<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Proem</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="proem" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Proem</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Without all fear, without presumption, he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wrote this work would speak respecting it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few brief words, and face his friend the world;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revising, not reversing, what hath been.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Poetry is itself a thing of God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made His prophets poets; and the more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We feel of poesie do we become</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like God in love and power⁠—under-makers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All great lays, equals to the minds of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deal more or less with the Divine, and have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For end some good of mind or soul of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind is this world’s, but the soul is God’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wise man joins them here all in his power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The high and holy works, amid lesser lays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand up like churches among village cots;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it is joy to think that in every age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However much the world was wrong therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatest works of mind or hand have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done unto God. So may they ever be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shows the strength of wish we have to be great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sublime humility of might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>True fiction hath in it a higher end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than fact; it is the possible compared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what is merely positive, and gives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the conceptive soul an inner world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A higher, ampler, Heaven than that wherein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nations sun themselves. In that bright state</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are met the mental creatures of the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose names are writ highest on the rounded crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Fame’s triumphal arch; the shining shapes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which star the skies of that invisible land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, whosoe’er would enter, let him learn;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not enough to draw forms fair and lively,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their conduct likewise must be beautiful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hearty holiness must crown the work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a gold cross the minster-dome, and show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like that instonement of divinity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the whole building doth belong to God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the book before us, though it were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What it is not, supremely little, like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The needled angle of a high church spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its sole end points to God the Father’s glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all eternity seen; making clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His might and love in saving sinful man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One bard shows God as He deals with states and kings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, as He dealt with the first man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, as with Heaven and earth and hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ours, as He loves to order a chance soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chosen out of the world, from first to last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all along it is the heart of man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Emblemed, created and creative mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a statued mind and naked heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is struck out. Other bards draw men dressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In manners, customs, forms, appearances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laws, places, times, and countless accidents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of peace or polity: to him these are not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He makes no mention, takes no compt of them:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shows, however great his doubts, sins, trials,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever earthborn pleasures soil man’s soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What power soever he may gain of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That still, till death, time is; that God’s great Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands open day and night to man and spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all are of the race of God, and have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In themselves good. The life-writ of a heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose firmest prop and highest meaning was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hope of serving God as poet-priest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the belief that He would not put back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love-offerings, though brought to Him by hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unclean and earthy, e’en as fallen man’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be; and most of all, the thankful show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of His high power and goodness in redeeming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blessing souls that love Him, spite of sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their old earthy strain⁠—these are the aims,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doctrines, truths, and staple of the story.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What theme sublimer than soul being, saved?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the bard’s aim to show the mind-made world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without, within; how the soul stands with God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the unseen realities about us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a view of life spiritual</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earthly. Let all look upon it, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the same light it was drawn and colored in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In faith, in that the writer too hath faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit an effect, and not a cause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith is a higher faculty than reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though of the brightest power of revelation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the snow-headed mountain rises o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lightning, and applies itself to Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know in day-time there are stars about us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as at night, and name them what and where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sight of science; so by faith we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although we may not see them till our night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spirits are about us, and believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, to a spirit’s eye, all Heaven may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As full of angels as a beam of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of motes. As spiritual, it shows all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Classes of life, perhaps, above our kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Known to tradition, reason, or God’s word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose bright foundations are the heights of Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As earthly, it embodies most the life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of youth, its powers, its aims, its deeds, its failings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as a sketch of world-life, it begins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ends, and rightly, in Heaven and with God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Heaven is also in the midst thereof.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>God, or all good, the evil of the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man, wherein are both, are each displayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mortal is the model of all men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foibles, follies, trials, sufferings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And manifest and manifold are they⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a young, hot, unworld-schooled heart that has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had its own way in life, and wherein all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May see some likeness of their own⁠—’tis these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attract, unite, and, sunlike, concentrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ever-moving system of our feelings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero is the world-man, in whose heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One passion stands for all, the most indulged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scenes wherein he plays his part are life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sphere whose centre is co-heavenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its divine original and end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like life, too, as a whole, the story hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moral, and each scene one, as in life⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One universal and peculiar truth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining upon it like the quiet moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Illustrating the obscure unequal earth;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though these scenes may seem to careless eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Irregular and rough and unconnected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the stones at Stonehenge⁠—though convolved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in primeval mystery⁠—still an use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A meaning, and a purpose may be marked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among them of a temple reared to God:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meaning alway dwelling in the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In secret sanctity, like a golden toy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid Beauty’s orbed bosom. Scenes of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Heaven are mixed, as flesh and soul in man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, the religion of the book is this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed out from the book God writ of old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All creatures being faulty by their nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by God made all liable to sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God only could atone⁠—and unto none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except Himself⁠—for universal sin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is thus that God did sacrifice to God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself unto Himself, in the great way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Triune mystery. His death, as man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was real as our own; and as, except</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the destruction of all life, there could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be no atonement for its sin, while life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth necessarily result from God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thought and outward action from ourselves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the atonement must be to and by Him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes it justice equally with love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all His powers and attributes are equal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And must make one in any act of His;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every act of God is infinite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He acts through all in all: the truth we know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He doth Himself inbreathe; the ill we do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath atoned for; and the scriptures show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That God doth suffer for the sins of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom He hath made, that are liable to sin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all of us He hath His agony;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are the cross, and death of God, and grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him love then all the more, and worship Him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lived and died, and rose from death for us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is and reigns forever God in all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let each man think himself an act of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mind a thought, his life a breath of God;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let each try, by great thoughts and good deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show the most of Heaven he hath in him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many who read the word of life, much doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether salvation be of grace or faith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Election, or repentance, or good works,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or God’s high will: reconcile all of them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each of the persons of the Triune God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath had His dispensation, hath it now;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father by His prophets, and the Son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In His own days, by His own deeds; and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Spirit, by the ministry of Christ;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus, by law, by gospel, and by grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scheme of God’s salvation is complete.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salvation, then, is God-like, threefold; so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That under one or other, all may come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By will of God alone, by faith in Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by repentance, and good works, and grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there is one salvation of the Father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the Son, another of the Spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each, the salvation of the Three in One.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mortal in this lay is saved of will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In manner as this hymn unfolds, which hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just warranty for every word from God’s.</span>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
				<p>
					<span>O God! Thou wondrous One in Three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As mortals must Thee deem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou only canst be said to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We but at best to seem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Thou dost save, and Thou may’st slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Const make a mortal soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Thee eternal; in a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilt bring to nought the whole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hardenest, and Thou openest hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in Thy Word is shown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou safest and destroyest parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Thy right will alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let down Thy grace, then, Lord! on all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Thou wilt save to live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! if they stumble, stop their fall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! if they fall, forgive!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They are forgiven from the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are predestined Thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though in sin they were the worst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Thee they are divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are, and were, and will be, Lord!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In one, in Heaven, in Thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea with the Spirit, and the Word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One God in Trinity.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>These principles and doctrines pending not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the action of the poem here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But over and above it, influencing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevertheless the story, as the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stars enwoven with our system, earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vary the view of this life’s hemisphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mingle it more palpably with Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with its changeless, ceaseless, boundless God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is thus that by creating to and from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternity, and multiplying ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own one Being through the universe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He doth eternize happiness, and make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good infinite by making all in Him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is but one great right and good; and ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wrong are shades thereof, not substances.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing can be antagonist to God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Necessity, like electricity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in ourselves and all things, and no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without us than within us; and we live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We of this mortal mixture, in the same law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the pure colourless intelligence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which dwells in Heaven, and the dead Hadëan shades.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will and act and talk of liberty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all our wills and all our doings both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are limited within this little life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free will is but necessity in play⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clattering of the golden reins which guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thunder-footed coursers of the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship which goes to sea informed with fire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeying only its own iron force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless of adverse tide, breeze dead, or weak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As infant’s parting breath, too faint to stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The feather held before it⁠—is as much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The appointed thrall of all the elements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the white-bosomed bark which wooes the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when it dies desists. And thus with man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>However contrary he set his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God, he is but working out His will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, at an infinite angle, more or less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeying his own soul’s necessity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only hath freewill whose will is fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Evil and good are God’s right hand and left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ministry of evil good is clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by temptation virtue; as of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the grave rose God. Let this be deemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough to justify the portion weighed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the great spirit Evil, named herein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If evil seem the most, yet good most is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As water may be deep and pure below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although the face be filmy for a time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if the spirit of evil seem more in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work than God, it is but to work His will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who therefore is all that the, other seems.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evil is in almost every scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of life more or less forward. Above all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystery of the Trinity is held,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mystery is its reasonableness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that is said of Deity is said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love and reverence. Be it so conceived.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What comes before and after the great world⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep in the secretest abyss of Light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Being’s most reserved immensity⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God alone knows eternally, who rends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mantling Heavens with his hands; but with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present is communion creatural:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He liveth in the sacrament of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the soul of man delineate here⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The outline half invisible⁠—is shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-sought grace, the self-aspiring truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And natural religion of the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contrasting Godhood with humanity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever; whereas the Spirit aye unites.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Temptation, and its workings in the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose faint and false resistance but assists⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambition, thirst of secret lore, joy, love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riverlike, doubling sometimes on itself⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adventure, pleasure, travel heavenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earthly, friendship, passion, poesie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Viewed ever in their spiritual end⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And power, celestial happiness and earth’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Millenial foretaste, ill annihilate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The restoration of the angels lost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one salvation universal given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all create⁠—all these, related, form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With much beside, the body of the work:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The islands, seas, and mainland of its orb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus much then for this book. It aims to mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The various belief as well as doubts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hold or search by turns the mind of youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unresting anywhere. Its heresies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If such they be, are charitable ones;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they who read not in the blest belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all souls may be saved, read to no end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were made to be saved. We are of God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor bates the book one tittle of the truth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smoothe its way to favour with the fearful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All rests with those who read. A work or thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is what each makes it to himself, and may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be full of great dark meanings, like the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shoals of life rushing; or like the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benighted with the wing of the wild dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweepng miles broad o’er the far western woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mighty glimpses of the central light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or may be nothing⁠—bodiless, spiritless.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now therefore to his work and to the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The writer bids, God speed! It matters not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they agree or differ. Each perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May bear true witness to another end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let then what hath been, be. It boots not here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To palliate misdoings. ’Twere less toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build Colossus than to hew a hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a statue. Hail and farewell, all!</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
