<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Heaven.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>, entering.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Archangels</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
								<p>
									<span>Infinite God! Thy will is done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world’s last sand is all but run:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The night is feeding on the sun.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All-being God! I come to Thee again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor come alone. Mortality is here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou bad’st me do my will, and I have dared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To do it. I have brought him up to Heaven;</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou canst not do what is not willed to be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suns are made up of atoms, Heaven of souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And souls and suns are but the atoms of</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The body I, God, dwell in. What wilt thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With him who is here with thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Show him God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No being, upon part of whom the curse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of death rests⁠—were it only on his shadow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can look on God and live.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Look, Festus, look!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Eternal fountain of the Infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On whose life-tide the stars seem strown like bubbles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive me that an atomie of being</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath sought to see its Maker face to face.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have seen all Thy works and wonders, passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From star to star, from space to space, and feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That to see all which can be seen is nothing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not to look on Thee the Invisible.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirits that I met all seemed to say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As on they sped upon their starward course,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And slackened their lightning wings on moment o’er me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I could not look on God whate’er I was.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Thou didst give this spirit at my side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Power to make me more than them immortal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So when we had winged through Thy wide world of things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And seen stars made and saved, destroyed and judged,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I said⁠—and trembled lest Thou shouldst not hear me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make Thyself right ready to forgive,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will see God, before I die, in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive me, Lord!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Rise, mortal! look on me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I see nothing but like dazzling darkness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew how it would be. I am away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am Thy creature, God! oh, slay me not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But let some angel take me, or I die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come hither, Festus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona"/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who art thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One who hath aye been by thee from thy birth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy guardian angel, thy good genius.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew thee not till now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am never seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the earth’s low thick light, but here in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in the air which God breathes, I am clear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tell to God each night thy thoughts and deeds;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And watching o’er thee both on earth and here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pray unto Him for thee and intercede.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And this is Heaven. Lead on. Will God forgive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I did long to see Him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is the strain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all high spirits towards Him. Thou couldst not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even if thou wouldst, behold God; masked in dust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine eye did light on darkness; but when dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the dust shaken off the shining essence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God shall glow through thee as through living glass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every thought and atom of thy being</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall guest His glory, be overbright with God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hadst thou not been by faith immortalized</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the instant, then thine eye had been thy death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, I will show thee Heaven and all angels.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! the recording angel.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Him I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High-seated, and the pen within his hand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Plumed like a storm-portending cloud which curves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Half over Heaven, and swift, in use divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is a warrior’s spear!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The book wherein</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are writ the records of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lies like a world laid open at his feet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there, the Book of Life which holds the names,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Formed out in starry brilliants, of God’s sons⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirit-names which angels learn by heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of worlds beforehand. Wilt thou see thine own?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My name is written in the Book of Life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is enough. That constellated word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is more to me and clearer than all stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Henceforward and for aye.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Raise still thine eyes!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy gleaming throne! hewn from that mount of light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was before created light or night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never created, Heaven’s eternal base,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon God’s throne is ’stablished. Sit on it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I will forestall nothing more than sight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Turn then and view yon streams where spirits sport</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quaffing immortal life, preparing aye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For higher and intenser Being still.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These are the upper fountains of the Heavens,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The emanations of Eternity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By washing them in which they purify</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their eyes to penetrate the essential light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all things hidden, seen alone by eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fire-spirited, etherially clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which like the fabled stone, conceived of fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Son of the sun, transmutes all seen to soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And such the bliss and power reserved for man;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet but the surface-shadow canst thou see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The substance is to be. Behold yon group</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of spirits blest! in their divinest eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirit speaks, and shows that in their own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All doubt and want hath ceased, as death hath ceased.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hither they come, rejoicing, marvelling.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How all with kindly wonder look on me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mayhap I tell of earth to their pure sense.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some seem as if they knew me. I know none.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But how claim kinship with the glorified</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless with them like-glorified! Yet, yes⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is⁠—it must be;⁠—that angelic spirit!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart outruns me⁠—mother! see thy son.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Child, how art thou here?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God hath let me come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast thou not come unbidden and unprepared?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forgive me, if it be so. I am come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have ever said there are two who will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive me aught I do⁠—my God and thou!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I do! may He!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dear mother, thou art blessed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I am blessed, too, in knowing thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Son of my hopes on earth and prayers In Heaven!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love of God! oh, it is infinite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as our imperfection. Promise, child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou wilt love Him more and more for this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for His boundless kindness thus towards me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, my son, hear me! for the hours of Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not as those of earth; and all is all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But lost that is not given unto God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft have I seen with joy thy thoughts of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And holy hopes, which track the soul with light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rise from dead doubts within thy troubled breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As souls of drowned bodies from the sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upwards to God, and marked them so received,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That oh! my soul hath overflowed with rapture</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As now thine eye with tears. But oh! my son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beloved! fear thou ever for thy soul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It yet hath to be saved. Nought perfect stands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that which is in Heaven. God is all-kind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And long time hath he made thee think of Him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think on Him yet in time. Ere I left earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the last breath which air would spare for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the last look which light would bless me with,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I prayed thou mightst be happy and be wise⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And half the prayer I brought myself to God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lo! thou art unhappy and unwise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Blessed one! I rejoice that thou art clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all who have cared for me, of my misdeeds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy spirit was on those who nurtured me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All word and practice that could be of good,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was given me; so that my sin is splendid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yes! if I have sinned, I have sinned sublimely;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I am glad I suffer for my faults.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would not if I might, be bad and happy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God laughs at ill by man made and allows it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The vaunt of mountainious evil and the power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To challenge Heaven from molehill, child!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God hath made but few better hearts than mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>However much it fail in the wise ways</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the world, as living in the dull dark streets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of forms and follies wherein men build themselves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The goodness of the heart is shown in deeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of peacefulness and kindness. Hand and heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are one thing with the good as thou shouldst be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The splendor of corruption hath no power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor vital essence; and content in sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shows apathy, not satisfied control.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do my words trouble thee? Then treasure them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pain overgot gives peace as death does Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things that speak of Heaven speak of peace.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Peace hath more might than war. High brows are calm.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great thoughts are still as stars; and truths, like suns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stir not; though many systems tend round them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind’s step is still as death’s; and all great things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which cannot be controlled, whose end is good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold yon throne! there, Love, Faith, Hope are one!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There, judgment, righteousness, and mercy make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One and the same thing. God’s salvation is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His vengeance, and his wrath glory, as on earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destruction restoration to the pure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Humanity is perfected in Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I did not make myself, nor plan my soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am no angel nursed in the lap of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor fed on milk immortal of the stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor golden fruit grown in the summery suns.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How am I answerable for my heart?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is my master, and is free with me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As fixed with fate, even as a star which moves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet moveth only on a certain course</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In certain mode;⁠—its liberties are laws,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its laws tyrannic; I cannot hinder it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It cannot hinder God. All that we do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or bear is settled from eternity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof is no beginning, midst, nor end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To act, is ours; quite sure, whate’er we do,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether it be for our own good or ill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or others’ ill or good, it is for God’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glory⁠—the same and always: it is ordered.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul is but an organ, and it hath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No power of good and evil in itself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More than the eye hath power of light or dark.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God fitted it for good; and evil is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Good, in another way we are not skilled in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The good we do is of His own good will⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ill, of His own letting. Doth not nature⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All light in life, shine, marsh-like, too, in death?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, wandering fires wait even on rottenness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a stray gleam of thought in an idiot’s brain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thus I look on souls that seem decaying</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In sin, and flying off by elements.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All may not live again; but all which do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must change perpetually e’en in Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not by death to death, but life to life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No! step by step, and throne by throne, we rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Continually towards the infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ever nearer⁠—never near⁠—to God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet merit or demerit none I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In nature, human or material,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In passions or affections good or bad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We only know that God’s best purposes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are oftenest brought about by dreadest sins.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is thunder evil or is dew divine?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Does virtue lie in sunshine, sin in storm?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is not each natural, each needful, best?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How know we what is evil from what good?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wrath and revenge God claimeth as His own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet men speculate on right and wrong</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As upon day and night, forgetting both</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have but one cause, and that the same⁠—God’s will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Originally, ultimately Him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All right is right divine. A worm hath rights</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A king cannot despoil him of, nor sin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet wrongs are things necessitate, like wants,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And oft are well permitted to best ends.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A double error sometimes sets us right.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In man there is no rule o£ right and wrong</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inherent as mere man. Why, conscience is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The basest thing of all. Its life is passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In justifying and condemning sin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accomplice, traitor, judge and headsman, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But conscience knows its business and performs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing is lost in nature; and no soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though buried in the centre of all sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is lost to God; but there it works His will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And burns comformably. The weakest things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are to be made the examples of His might;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The most defective, of His perfect grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whene’er He thinketh well. Oh! everything</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me seems good and lovely and immortal;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The whole is beautiful; and I can see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nought wrong in man nor nature, nought not meant;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As from His hands it comes who fashions all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All holy as His word. The world is but</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A revelation. He breathes Himself upon us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before our birth, as o’er the formless void</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He moveth at first, and we are all inspired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With His spirit. All things are God or of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the whole world is in the mind of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What a thought is in ours. Why boast we then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of aught? All that is good belongs to God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And good and God are all things, or shall be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There lacks in souls like thine unsaved, unraised,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The light within⁠—the light of perfectness⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such a there is in Heaven. The soul hath sunk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And perished like a light-house in the sea;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is for God to raise it and rebuild.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And his, thy son’s, He will raise. Since with me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have shown him infinite wonders: we have oped</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And scanned the golden scroll of Fate, wherein</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are writ, in God’s own hand, all things which happen.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There we have seen the record of his being⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His long temptation, sin, and suffering.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And hear it, oh beloved and blessed one!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine own salvation!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God is great in love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Infinite in His nature, power, and grace;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creating, and redeeming, and destroying⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Infinite infinitely. But in love⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! it is the truth transcendant over all⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When thus to one poor spirit He gives His hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He seems to impart His own unboundedness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of bliss. We seem to be hardly worth destroying,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And much less saving; yet He loveth each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though all were His equal.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have to go through henceforth⁠—all the doubts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passions of life, and woes; but knowing them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hinders them not; I bear obeyingly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pine no more, as once when I looked back</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And saw how life had balked, and foiled, and fooled me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fresh as a spouting spring upon the hills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart leapt out to life; it little thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all the vile cares that would rill into it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the low places it would have to go through⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The drains, the crossings, and the null-work after.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God hath endowed me with a soul that scorns life⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An element over and above the world’s:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the price one pays for pride is mountain-high,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a curse beyond the rack of death⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A woe, wherein God hath put out His strength⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A pain past all the mad wretchedness we feel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the sacked secret hath flown out of us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the heart broken open by deep care⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The curse of a high spirit famishing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because all earth but sickens it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, child!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fulfil thy fate! Be⁠—do⁠—bear⁠—and thank God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me it seems as I had lived all ages</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since I left earth; and thou art yet scarce man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It was not, mother, that I knew thy face; strange</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The luminous eclipse that is on it now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though it was fair on earth, would have made it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even to one who knew as well as he loved thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if these time-tired eyes ever imaged thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It was but for a moment, and the sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passed; and my life was broken like a line</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At the first word⁠—but my heart cried out in me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew thee well. And now to earth again!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, son! and say to all who once were mine⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love them, and expect them.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Blessed one!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I charge thee, Genius, bear him safely.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Through light, and night, and all the powers of air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have a passport.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God be with thee, child!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I feel happier, better, nobler now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See where she sits, and smiles, and points me out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To those who sit along with her. Who are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The two?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One is the mother of mankind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And one the mother of the Man who saved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mankind; and she, thine own, the mother of</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The last man of mankind⁠—for thou art he.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Am I? It is enough: I have seen God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God and His great idea, the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are over and above us. Be the one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worshipped, the other reverently proved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt sojourn for a time among the worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And test their natures?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Gladly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Genius</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Seek we, then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All rareness and variety these worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can offer, ere we reach thine orb. Descend!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now is the age of worlds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
