<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Another and a better world.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What a sweet world! Which is this, Lucifer?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This is the star of evening and of beauty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Otherwise Venus. I will stay here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is but a visit</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let us look about us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is Heaven, it must be; aught so beautiful</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must, I am sure, have feeling. Cannot worlds live?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Least things have life. Why not the greatest, too?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An atom is a world, a world an atom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seen relatively: Death an act of Life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This is a world where every loveliest thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lasts longest; where decay lifts never head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above the grossest forms, and matter here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all transparent substance; the flower fades not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The beautiful die never, here: Death lies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dreaming⁠—he has nought to do⁠—the babe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Plays with his darts. Nought dies but what should die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here are no earthquakes, storms, nor plagues; no Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At heart; no floating flood on high. The soil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is ever fresh and fragrant as a rose⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The skies, like one wide rainbow, stand on gold⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The clouds are light as rose leaves⁠—and the dew,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis of the tears which stars weep, sweet with joy⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The air is softer than a loved one’s sigh⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ground is glowing with all priceless ore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And glistening with gems like a bride’s bosom⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The trees have silver stems and emerald leaves⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fountains bubble nectar⁠—and the hills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are half alive with light. Yet it is not Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh, how this world should pity man’s! I love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To walk earth’s woods when the storm bends his bow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And volleys all his arrows off at once;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when the dead brown branch comes crashing close</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To my feet, to tread it down, because I feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Decay my foe: and not to triumph’s worse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than not to win. It is wrong to think on earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But terror hath a beauty even as mildness;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have felt more pleasure far on earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When, like a lion or a day of battle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The storm rose, roared, shook out his shaggy mane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And leaped abroad on the world, and lay down red,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Licking himself to sleep as it got light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in the cataract-like tread of a crowd,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And its irresistable rush, flooding the green</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though it came to doom, than e’er I can</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Feel in this faery orb of shade and shine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love earth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art mad to dote on earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When with this sphere of beauty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is the blush</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of being; surely, too, a maiden world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unmarred by thee. Touch it not, Lucifer!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is too bright to tarnish.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Didst thou fail?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot fail. With me success is nature.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am the cause, means consequence of ill.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou canst not yet enjoy a sensuous world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Refined though ne’er so little o’er thine own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet wouldst enter Heaven. Valhalla’s halls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sculls o’erbrimmed with mead, Elysian plains⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eden, where life was toilless, and gave man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things to live with, nothing to live for;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Moslem’s bowers of love, and streams of wine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And palaces of purest adamant,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where dark-eyed houris, with their young white arms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ever virgin, woo and welcome ye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Chaldee’s orbs of gold, where dwells the primal Light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were all too pure to thee; yet shalt thou be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely in Heaven, ere Death unlock the heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I said that I would show thee marvels here;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For here dwell many angels⁠—many souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who have run pure through earth, or been made pure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By their salvation since. It is a mart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all the holy spirits of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perform sweet interchange, and purchase truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With truth, and love with love. Hither came He,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Son⁠—the Savior of the universe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not in the stable-state He went to earth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A servant unto slaves; but as a God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Carrying His kingdom with Him, and His Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo, here are spirits! and all seem to love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each other.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He hath only half a heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who loves not all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak for me to some angel.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See, here is one, a very soul of beauty:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the muse. I know her by the lyre</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hung on her arm, and eye like fount of fire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Muse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mortal, approach! I am the holy Muse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom all the great and bright of spirit choose⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis I who breathe my soul into the lips</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of those great lights whom death nor time eclipse;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis I who wing the loving heart with song,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And set its sighs to music on the tongue:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is I who watch, and, with sweet dreams, reward</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The starry slumbers of the youthful bard;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I love every thing that is sweet and bright.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And but this morn, with the first wink of light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sunbeam left the sun, and, as it sped,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I followed, watched, and listened what it said:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherefore, with all this brightness am I given</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From sun to earth? Am I not fit for Heaven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From God I came once; and, though worlds have passed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ages, and dooms, yet I am light to the last.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever God hath once bent to His will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is sacred; so the world’s to be loved still.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What of this swift, this bright, but downward being,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too burning to be borne⁠—too brief for seeing?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is mine aim⁠—mine end? I would not die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In dust, or water, or an idiots eye:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would not cease in blood, nor end in fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor light the loveless to their low desire:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No; let me perish on the poet’s page,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where he kisses from his beauty’s brow all age;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spelling it fair for aye, and wrinkle scorning,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when first that brow brake on him like a morning.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But yet I cannot quit this line I tread,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though it lead and leave me to the eyeless dead:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is mine errand: ’tis for this I come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And live, and die, and go down to my doom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is my fate⁠—right and bright to speed on.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God is His own God: fate and fall are one.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Straight from the sun I go, like life from God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which hits, now on a heaven, now on a clod.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, spite of all, the world’s air warps our way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And crops the roses off the cheek of day;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As some false friend, who holds our fall in trust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oils our decline, and hands us to the dust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where are the sunbeams gone of the young green earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Search dust and night: our death makes dear our birth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It said⁠—and saw earth; and one moment more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell bright beside a vine-shadowed cottage door:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In it came⁠—glanced upon a glowing page,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where, youth forestalling and foreshortening age⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weak with the work of thought, a boyish bard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sate suing night and stars for his reward.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sunbeam swerved and grew, a breathing, dim,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the first time, as it lit and looked on him:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His forehead faded⁠—pale his lip and dry⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hollow his cheek⁠—and fever fed his eye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clouds lay about his brain, as on a hill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quick with the thunder thought, and lightning will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His clenched hand shook from its more than midnight clasp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till his pen fluttered like a winged asp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that no deadly poison blacked its lips:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas his to life-enlighten, not eclipse;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor would he shade one atom of another,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To have a sun his slave, a god his brother.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The young moon laid her down as one who dies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Knowing that death can be no sacrifice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that the sun, her god, through nature’s night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall make her bosom to grow great with light.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still he sate, though his lamp sunk; and he strained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His eyes to work the nightness which remained.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vain pain! he could not make the light he wanted,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And soon thought’s wizard ring gets disenchanted.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When earth was dayed⁠—was morrowed⁠—the first ray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perched on his pen, and diamonded its way;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sunray that I watched; which, proud to mark</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The line it loved as deathless, there died dark⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Died in the only path it would have trod,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were there as many ways as worlds to God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There, in the eye of God again to burn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ab all man’s glory unto God’s must turn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so may sunbeams ever guide his pen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God his heart, who lights the morn of men;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For this life is but Being.s first faint ray;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sun on sun, and heaven on heaven, make up God’s day.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And were there suns in day as stars in night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They would shew but like one ray from out His full-sphered light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As but one momentary gleam would fly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, as years, the arrows of eternity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Poets are all who love⁠—who feel great thruths⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tell them; and the truth of truths is love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There was a time⁠—oh, I remember well!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When, like a sea-shell with its seaborn strain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My soul aye rang with music of the lyre;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And my heart shed its lore as leaves their dew⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A honey dew, and throve on what it shed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things I loved; but song I loved in chief.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imagination is the air of mind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Judgment its earth, and memory its main;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passion its fire. I was at home in Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swiftlike I lived above: once touching earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The meanest thing might master me: long wings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But baffled. Still and still I harped on song.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! to create within the mind is bliss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, shaping forth the lofty thought, or lovely,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We seek not, need not Heaven: and when the thought⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cloudy and shapeless, first forms on the mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slow darkening into, some gigantic make,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How the heart shakes with pride and fear, as heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quakes under its own thunder: or as might,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of old, the mortal mother of a god,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When first she saw him lessening up the skies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I began the toil divine of verse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which like a burning-bush, doth guest a god.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But this was only wing-flapping⁠—not flight;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pawing of the courser ere he win;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till, by degrees, from wrestling with my soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I gathered strength to keep the fleet thoughts fast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And made them bless me. Yes, there was a time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When tomes of ancient song held eye and heart⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were the sole lore I recked of: the great bards</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Greece, of Rome, and mine own master land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And they who in the holy book are deathless⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men who have vulgarized sublimity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bought up truth for the nations; parted it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As soldiers lotted once the garb of God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men who have forged gods⁠—uttered⁠—made them pass:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In whose words, to be read with many a heaving</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the heart, is a power, like wind in rain⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sons of the sons of God, who, in olden days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did leave their passionless Heaven for earth and woman,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brought an immortal to a mortal breast;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, like a rainbow clasping the sweet earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And melting in the covenant of love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Left here a bright precipitate of soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which lives for ever through the lines of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flashing, by fits, like fire from an enemy’s front⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose thoughts, like bars of sunshine in shut rooms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mid gloom, all glory, win the world to light⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who make their very follies like their souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, like the young moon with a ragged edge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still, in their imperfection, beautiful⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose weaknesses are lovely as their strengths.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the white nebulous matter between stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, if not lights at least is likest light⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men whom we build our love round like an arch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of triumph, as they pass us on their way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To glory and to immortality;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men whose great thoughts possess us like a passion</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through every limb and the whole heart; whose words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Haunt us as eagles haunt the mountain air;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thoughts which command all coming times and minds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As from a tower a warden⁠—fix themselves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep in the heart as meteor stones in earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dropped from some higher sphere; the words of gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fragments of the undeemed tongues of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men who walk up to fame as to a friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or their own house, which from the wrongful heir</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They have wrested, from the world’s hard hand and gripe⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men who, like Death, all bone, but all unarmed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have ta’en the giant world by the throat, and thrown him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And made him swear to maintain their name and fame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At peril of his life⁠—who shed great thoughts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As easily as an oak looseneth its golden leaves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a kindly largess to the soil it grew on⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose rich dark ivy thoughts, sunned o’er with love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flourish around the deathless stems of their names⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose names are ever on the world’s broad tongue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like sound upon the falling of a force⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose words, if winged, are with angels’ wings⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who play upon the heart as on a harp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make our eyes bright as we speak of them⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose hearts have a look southwards, and are open</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the whole noon of nature⁠—these I have waked</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wept o’er, night by night; oft pondering thus:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Homer is gone; and where is Jove? and where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rival cities seven? His song outlives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time, tower, and god⁠—all that then was save Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Muse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, but the poor perfections of thine earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be as little as nothing to thee here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God must be happy, who aye makes; and since</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind’s first of things, who makes from mind is blest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er men. Thus saith the bard to his work:⁠—I am</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy god, and bid thee live as my God me:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I live or die with thee, soul of my soul!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou camest and went’st, sunlike, from morn to eve:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And smiledst fire upon my heaving heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the sun in the sea, tall it arose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dashed about its house all might and mirth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like ocean’s tongue in Staffa’s stormy cave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art a weakly reed to lean upon;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, like that reed the false one filched from Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full of immortal fire⁠—immortal as</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The breath of God’s lips⁠—every breath a soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Muse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mortal! the muse is with thee: leave her not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Once my ambition to another end</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stirred, stretched itself, but slept again. I rose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dashed on earth the harp, mine other heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, ringing, brake; its discord ruinous</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Harmony still; and coldly I rejoiced</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No other joy I had, wormlike, to feed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon my ripe resolve. It might not be;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The more I strove against, the more I loved it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, let as walk along. So say farewell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Muse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No; my greeting is forever.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, well, come on!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! shew me that sweet soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou brought’st to me the first night that we met.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She must be here, where all are good and fair:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou didst promise me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is that not she</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Walking alone, up-looking to thine earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, lo! it shineth through the mid-day air.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is! it is!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, I will come again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Knowest thou me, mine own immortal love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall I call thee? Say, what mayest thou be!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am a spirit, Festus; and I love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy spirit, and shall love, when once like mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More than we ever did or can even now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pure spirits are of Heaven all heavenly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet marvel not to meet me in this guise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All radiant like a diamond as it is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We wander in what way we will through all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or any of these worlds, and wheresoe’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are, there Heaven is, here, and there too, God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou dost remember me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, every thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And look of love which thou hast lent to me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes daily through my memory as stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wear through the dark.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thou art happy, love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes: I am happy when I can do good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To be good is to do good. Who dwell here?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are they all deathless⁠—happy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All are not:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some err, though rarely⁠—slightly. Spirits sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only in thought; and they are of a race</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Higher than thine⁠—have fewer wants and less</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Temptations⁠—many more joys⁠—greater powers.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They need no civil sway: each rules himself⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Obeys himself: all live, too, as they choose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And they choose nought but good. They who have come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From earth, or other orb, use the same powers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passions, and purposes, they had e’er death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Although enlarged and freed, to nobler ends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With better means. Here the hard warrior whets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sword of truth, and steels his soul against sin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fierce and lawless wills which trooped it over</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His breast⁠—the speared desires that overran</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fairest fields of virtue, sleep and lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a slain host ’neath snow; he dyes his hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep in the blood of evil passions. Mind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no passion evil in itself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heaven we shall enjoy all to right ends.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There sit the perfect women, perfect men;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Minds which control themselves, hearts which indulge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Designs of wondrous goodness, but so far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only, as soul extolled to bliss and power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most high, sees fit for each, divinely. Here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The statesman makes new laws for growing worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through their forefated ages. Here, the sage</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Masters all mysteries, more and more, from day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To day, watching the thoughts of men and angels</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through moral microscopes; or hails afar,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By some vast intellectual instrument,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mighty spirits, good or bad, which range</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The space of mind; some spreading death and woe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On far off worlds⁠—some great with good and life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And here the poet, like that wall of fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In ancient song, surrounds the universe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lighting himself, where’er he soars or dives,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With his own bright brain⁠—this is the poet’s heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here he may realize each form or scene</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He e’er on earth imagined; or bid dreams</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stand fast, and faery palaces appear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here he has Heaven to hear him; to the which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He sings, with manlike voice and song, the love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which lent him his whole strength, as is the wont</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all great spirits and good throughout the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! happiest of the happy is the bard!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here, too, some pluck the branch of peace wherewith</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To greet a suffering saint, and shew his flood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of woe hath sunken: this I love to do.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My love, we shall be happy here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shall I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever come here?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou mayest. I will pray for thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And watch thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou wilt have, then, need to weep.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This heart must run its orbit. Pardon thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its many sad deflections. It will return</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee and to the primal goal of Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Practice thy spirit to great thoughts and things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou mayst start, when here, from vantage ground,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We can foretell the future of ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fateful only to himself is each.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I do not fear to die; for, though I change</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mode of being, I shall ever be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>World after world will fall at my right hand;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The glorious future be the past despised:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All now that seemeth bright will soon seem dim,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And darker grow, like earth, as we approach it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While I still stand upon yon heaven which now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hangs over me. If aught can make me seek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Other to be than that lost soul I fear me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is, that thou lovest me. Heaven were not Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am here now. Art thou ready?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us go.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well⁠—farewell. It makes me grieve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bid a loved one back to yon false world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give up even a mortal unto death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wilt forget me soon, or seek to do.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When I forget that the stars shine in air⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I forget that beauty is in stars⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I forget that love with beauty is⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will I forget thee: till then, all things else.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy love to me was perfect from the first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as the rainbow in its native skies:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It did not grow: let meaner things mature.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The rainbow dies in heaven, and not on earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But love can never die; from world to world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up the high wheel of heaven, it lives for aye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remember that I wait thee, hoping, here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life is the brief disunion of that nature</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which hath been one and same in Heaven ere now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shall be yet again, renewed by Death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come to me when thou diest!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will, I will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then, in each other’s arms, we will waft through space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit in spirit, one! or we will dwell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Among these immortal groves; or watch new worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As, like the great thoughts of a Maker-mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are rounded out of chaos: and we will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be oft on earth with those we love, and help them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For God hath made it lawful for good souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make souls good; and saints to help the saintly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou right soon mayst fold unto thy heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blissful consciousness of separate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oneness with God, in Him in whom alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The saved are deathless, shall become, for thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My earliest, earnest, and most constant prayer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! what is dear to creatures of the earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life, love, fight, liberty! But dearer far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than all⁠—and oh! an universe more divine⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gift, which God endows his chosen with,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of His own uncreated glory⁠—His</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before all worlds, all ages, and reserved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till after all for those He loves and saves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when the eye first views some Andean chain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of shadowy rolling mountains, based on air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Height upon height, aspiring to the last,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even to Heaven, in sunny snow sheen, up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stretching the angel’s pinions, nor can tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which be the loftiest nor the loveliest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when an army, wakening with the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Starts to its feet all hope, spear after spear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And line on line reundulating light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While night’s dull watchfires reek themselves away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So feels the spirit when it first receives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright and mountainous mysteries of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Containing Heaven, moving themselves towards us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In their free greatness, as by ships at sea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come icebergs, pure and pointed as a star</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Afar off glittering, of invisible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Depth, and dissolving in the light above.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My prayer shall be that thy prayer be fulfilled.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must to earth again. Farewell, sweet soul!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angela</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Farewell! I love thee, and will oft be with thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I like earth more than this: I rather love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A splendid failing than a petty good;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as the thunderbolt, whose course is downwards,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is nobler far than any fire which soars.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am determined to be good again⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again? When was I otherwise than ill?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Does not sin pour from my soul like dew from earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, vapouring up before the face of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Congregate there in clouds between Heaven and me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What wonder that I lack delight of life?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For it is thus⁠—when amid the world’s delights,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How warm so’er we feel a moment among them⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We find ourselves, when the hot blast hath blown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prostrate, and weak, and wretched, even as I am.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wish that I could leap from off this star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dash my soul to atoms like a glass.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have done nothing for thee yet. Thou shalt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See Heaven, and Hell, and all the sights of space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When’er thou choosest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not then now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Up! rise!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No; I’ll be good: and will see none of them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth draws us like a loadstone. We are coming.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
