<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-27" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Garden and bower by the sea.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alone.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, Festus, let me think on thee, my love!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fold the thought of thee unto my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until it fills it, and is one with it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! these poor arms are far from where they should be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this heart farther still. Mine only love!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why art thou thus so long away from me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have whispered it unto the southern wind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And charged it with my love: why should it not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Carry that love to thee as air bears light?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou hast said I was all light to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stars grow bright together, and for aye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lover-like, watch each other; and though apart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like us, they fill each other’s eyes with love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And beauty: and mine only fill with tears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh! life is less than nothing without love!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what is love without the embrace of love?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would give worlds for one more ere I die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Festus! come to me. I do think I am dying.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me bequeath my life to thee, that so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In doubling thine, I may live alway with thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know that I am dying. It is my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which makes me live that kills me. But I want</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see him ere I do die. Oh! he will come!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He must know how I love him. It is long⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long since I saw him: I am ill with waiting.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will fancy him coming to me now⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now he is thinking of me, loving me⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sees me⁠—flies to me, half out of breath⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His hand is on my arm⁠—he looks on me⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And puts my long locks backwards⁠—God! Thy ban</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lies upon waking dreams. To weep and sleep⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dream⁠—wake, and find one’s only one hope false⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is what we can bear, for we do endure it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear with Heaven still. Just one year ago,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I watched that large bright star where it is now:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Time hath not touched its everlasting lightning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor dimmed the glorious glances of its eye⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor passion clouded it⁠—nor any star</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Eclipsed⁠—it is the leader still of Heaven.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I who loved it then can love it now;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But am not what I was, in one degree.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Calm star! who was it named thee Lucifer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From him who drew the third of Heaven down with him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh! it was but the tradition of thy beauty!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For if the sun hath one part, and the moon one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast the third part of the host of Heaven⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is its power⁠—which power is its beauty!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It was no tradition, lady, but of truth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I thought we parted last to meet no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It was so lady; but it is not so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Am I to leave, or thou, then?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Neither, yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I mean that thou shouldst fear me and obey.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And who art thou that I should fear and serve?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am the morning and the evening star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The star thou lovest and thy lover too;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am that star! as once before I told thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though thou wouldst not believe me, but I am</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A spirit, and a star⁠—a power⁠—an ill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which doth outbalance being. Look at me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I not more than mortal in my form?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Millions of years have circled round my brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like worlds upon their centres;⁠—still I live;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And age but presses with a halo’s weight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This single arm hath dashed the light of Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This one hand dragged the angels from their thrones:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I not worthy to have loved thee, lady?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou mortal model of all Heavenliness!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet I have abandoned all these spoils,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cowered my powers, and becalmed my course,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stooped from the high destruction of the skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thee, and for the youth who loveth thee⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And is lost with ye: ye are both, both⁠—lost!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast but served the purpose of the Fiend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou art but the vessel of the sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose poison hath made drunk a soul to death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he hath drunk; and thou art useless now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And it is for this I come; to bid thee die!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I said that I was dying. God is good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heavens grow darker as they grow the purer:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And both, as we do near them; so, near death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul grows darker and diviner, hourly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could I love less I should be happier!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But it is always to that mad extreme,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That death alone appears the fitting finish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bliss like that my spirit presses for.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy death hall be as gentle as thy life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will not hurt thee, for I loved thee once.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thy sweet love, upon my burning breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell like a snowflake on a fevered lip.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy soul shall pass out of thee like a dream.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One moment more, and thou shalt wake in Heaven!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I ever thought thee to be more than mortal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if thou art thus mighty, grant me this!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since now we love no more⁠—as friend to friend⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring him I love, one moment, ere I die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou judgest well; I am all but almighty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have stretched my strength unto its limits</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To satisfy the heart of him who loves thee:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In proof whereof, did I not give up thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because he loved thee? I have given him all things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Body or spirit could desire or have.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And even at this moment, now he reigns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>King of the sun, and monarch of the seven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orbs that surround him⁠—leaving earth alone⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earth is in good keeping as it is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know that he is hasting hither now;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But may not see thee living.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is not thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who takest life: it is God, whose I shall be!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And his, with God, whom here my heart deifies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I glory in his power as in his love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I will, will see him while I am alive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hear him⁠—he is come⁠—it is he! it is he!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Die! thou shalt never look on him again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My love! haste, Festus! I am dying⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dead!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A word could kill her. She hath gone to Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fiend! what is this? Elissa⁠—she is not dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She is. I bade her die, as I had reason.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now do I hate thee and renounce for ever!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Abhor thee⁠—go!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who seeks the other first?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Away, Fiend! Leave me! My Elissa!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
