<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Everywhere.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, earth is in the very midst of Heaven!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And space, though void of things, feels full of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath space no limit?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None to thee. Yet, if</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Infinite, it would equal God; and that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To think of is most vain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet if not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Infinite how can God exist therein?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No. So soon when placed beside</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The infinite the poor immortal fails.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Space is God’s space: Eternity is His</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternity; His, Heaven. He only holds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perfections which are but the impossible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To other beings.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We are things of time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With God time is not. Unto Him all is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Present Eternity. Worlds, beings, years,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all their natures, powers, and events,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The range whereof when making He ordains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unfold themselves like flowers. He foresees</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not, but sees all at once. Time must not be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Contrasted with Eternity: ’tis not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A second of the everlasting year.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perfections although infinite with God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are all identical; as much of Him⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And holy is His mercy, merciful</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His wisdom, wise His love, and kind his wrath⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As form, extension, parts, are requisites</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of matter. Spirit hath no parts. It is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One substance, whole and indivisible,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever else. Souls see each other clear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At one glance, as two drops of rain in air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might look into each other, had they life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death does away disguise. Even here I feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Among these mighty things, that, as I am,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am akin to God;⁠—that I am part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the use universal, and can grasp</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some portion of that reason in the which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The whole is ruled and founded;⁠—that I have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A spirit nobler in its cause and end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lovelier in order, greater in its powers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than all these bright immensities⁠—how swift!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And doth creation’s tide for ever flow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor ebb with like destruction? World on world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are they for ever heaping up, and still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mighty measure never full?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is powers habit; alway to create,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s; which, thus ever causing worlds, to Him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nought cumbrous more than new down to a wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye multiplies at once my power and pain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have seen many frames of being pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This generation of the universe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will soon be gathered to its grave. These worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which bear its sky-pall, soon will follow thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I, both. All things must die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What are ye orbs?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The words of God⁠—the Scriptures of the skies?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For words with Him cannot be passing, nor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Less real, vast, or glorious than yourselves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is a great poem, and the worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The words it is writ in, and we souls the thoughts.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye cannot die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Think not on death. Here all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is life, light, beauty. Harp not so on death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot help me, spirit! Chide no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As who dare gaze the sun, doth after see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Betwixt him and else a dark sun in his eye;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I, once having braved my burning doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See nought beside⁠—or that in everything.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hark, what is that I hear?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>An angel weeping⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth’s guardian angel. She is ever weeping.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See where she flies, spirit-torn, round the heavens,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a fore-feel of madness about the brain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span class="i2">Star, stars!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Stop your bright cars!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Stint your breath⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Repent ere worse⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think of the death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the universe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fear doom, and fear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fate of your kin-sphere.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As a corse in the tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth! thou art laid in doom:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worm is at thy heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I see all things part:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright air thicken,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thunder-stricken:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Birds from the sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shower like leaves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Streamlets stop</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like ice on leaves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun go blind:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swoon the wind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On the high hill top⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swoon and die:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth rear off her cities</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As a horse his rider;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And still, with each death-strain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her heart-wound tear wider:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lion roar and die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With his eye-balls on the sky:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The eagle scream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And drop like a beam:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men crowd and cry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out on this deathful dream!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A low dull sound⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis the march of many bones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under ground;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up! and they fling,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a fly’s wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Off them the grey grave-stones;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They sit in their biers⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Father and mother,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man and wife,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sister and brother,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As in life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lady and lover⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love all over.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their flesh re-appears⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their hearts beat⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their eyes have tears:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe! woe!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do they speak?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stir? No!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tongues were too weak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save to repeat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But they smile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a while;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For to wipe from His word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dust of years,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He comes! he comes! the Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man-God, re-appears;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bless, and to save</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From death and the grave⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To redeem and deliver</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever and ever!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dead rise⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death dies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, Time, and sink</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy great thoughts in the sea!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And quench thy red link!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let him flutter to rest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On thy God-nursing breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mother Eternity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is for me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Poor angel! Ah! it is the good who suffer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look! like a cloud, she has wept herself away.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What of this world we view and all yon worlds?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If God made not all things from nothing, how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is He creator? Something must exist</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If otherwise, eternal with Himself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all things had not origin in Him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He made all things of Him. The visible world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is as the Christ of nature; God the maker</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In matter made self manifest through time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things are formed of all things⁠—all of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is made of wonders. Every day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is born a new creation. Every orb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath its revealed word; and every race</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Being hath its judgment, or shall have.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Are all these worlds, then, stocked with souls like man’s⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Free, fallible, and sinful?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, they are.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All creature-minds, like man’s, are fallible.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The seraph who in Heaven highest stands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May fall to ruin deepest. God is mind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pure, perfect, sinless. Man imperfect is⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Momently sinning. Evil then results</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From imperfection. The idea of good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is owned in imperfection’s lowest form.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God would not, could not, make aught wholly ill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor aught not like to err. Man never was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perfect nor pure, or he would be so now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy nature hath some excellencies⁠—these</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft thwarted by low lusts and wicked wills.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What then? They are necessitate in kind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As change in nature, or as shade to light.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No darkness hath the sun⁠—no weakness God:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These only be the faulty qualities</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of secondary natures⁠—planets, men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God hath no attributes unless To Be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be one: ’twould mix Him with the things He hath made.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God is all God, as life is that which lives.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am a mighty spirit, and yet I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am but to God what lightning is to light:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lightning slays one thing⁠—light makes all things live.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bear, then, thy necessary ills with grace;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No positive estate or principle</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is Evil⁠—debtor wholly for its form</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And measure to defect⁠—defect to good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Good’s the sole positive principle in the world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is only thus, that what God makes, He loves⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And must: the others are but off-shoots. Ill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is limited. One cannot form a scheme</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For universal evil; not even I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Can imperfection from perfection come?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can God make aught defective?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How aught else?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are but three proportions in all things⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The greater⁠—equal⁠—less. God could not make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A God above Himself, nor equal with⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By nature and necessity the Highest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, if He make, it must be lesser minds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Little and less from angels down to men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose natures are imperfect, as His own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must be all-perfect. These two states are not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Except as whole unto its parts, opposed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And evil is itself no ill unless</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creation be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is God the cause of evil?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So far as evil comes from imperfection,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And imperfection from the things He hath made,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what He hath made from His will to make.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! let me rest, be it but a moment’s pause!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This endless light-like journey wearies me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remember still my spirit toils in dust⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dark close cloud.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alight, then, on this orb.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not wearied: I will watch by thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He sleeps⁠—he dreams. How far men see in dreams!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In dreams they can accomplish worlds of things:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart then suffers a fusion of all feeling</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Back to its youthful hours of innocence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And nakedness, and paradise; ere yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world had wound a perishing garb around it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While yet its God came down and spake to it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such and so great are dreams. My might, my being</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To him is but a dream’s. And could a state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To come fill up their dream-stretched minds, they might</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be gods. And may it not be so? Then man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is worth my ruining. What does he dream?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the sway his spirit now exerts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er time, space, thought it is but a shadowy sway,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Light as a mountain shadow on a lake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine is the mountain’s self. A touch would shake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To nought whatever his soul now feels or acts;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But not a world-quake could touch aught of mine:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus much we differ. I will not envy man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Power alone makes being bearable.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet this dream-power is mind-power⁠—real:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things are real: fiction cannot be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A thought is real as the world⁠—a dream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>True as all God doth know⁠—with whom all is true.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deep dense sleep of half-dead exhaustedness!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I could feel it. Ah! he wakes at last.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I have dreamed a dream so beautiful!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methought I lay as it were here; and, lo!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A spirit came and gave me wings of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which thrice I waved delighted. Up we flew</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sheer through the shining air, far past the sun’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Broad blazing disk⁠—past where the great great snake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Binds in his bright coil half the host of Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past thee, Orion! who, with arm uplift,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Threatening the throne of God, dost ever stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sublimely impious; and thy mighty mace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whirling on high, down from its glorious seat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drops, crushed and shattered, many a shining world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so the brave and beautiful of old</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Believed thou wast a giant made of worlds:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And they were rights if thus they bodied out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The immortal mind; for it hath starlike beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worldlike might; and is as high above</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The things it scorns, and will make war with God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though He gave it earth and Heaven, and arms to win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Them both; and, spite of lust and pride, to earn them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now thy soul informs yon hundred stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As mine my limbs⁠—well, ’tis a noble end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What now to thee be mortal maid or goddess?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look! she who fled thee once, now loves and longs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To clasp thee to her cold and beamy breast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pine moon! thou art as far below him now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As once she was above thee, thou of the world-belt!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she who had thee, and who knew thee god,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Died of her boast, and lies in her own dust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she who loved thee, the young blushy Morning,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who caught thee in her arms, and bore thee off</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far o’er the lashing seas to a lonely isle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where she might pleasure longer and in secret⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That love undid thee; and it is so now:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether the beauty seek, or flee, or have,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis a like ill⁠—this beauty doubly mortal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What though the moon with madness slew thee there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let me believe it was within the arms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That loved thee even in the stroke of death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that there snapped the lightning link of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Kill, but not conquer, man nor mind may gods.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou image of the Almighty error, man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Banished and banned to Heaven, by a weak world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which makes the minds it cannot master gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, the first and greatest of half-gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which they in olden time did star together</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To an idolatrous immortality;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who nationalized the Heavens, and gave all stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto the spirits of the good and brave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forestalling God by ages⁠—wondrous men!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if⁠—beguiled by wine, and the low wiles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wouldst not creep to meet, and a drunken sleep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to high noon in the midst of all his might,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Close by the brink of immortality⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deep dominions of thy sea-sire, thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Didst lose thy light by kings who hate the great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou only hadst to stand up to the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gain again thine eyes. So the great king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world, the tyrant we elect, in vain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Puts out the eyes of mind: it looks to God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And reaps its light again. Wherefore, revenge!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out with the sword! the world will run before thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orion! belted giant of the skies!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou with the treble strain of godhood in thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>March! there is nought to hinder thee in Heaven:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past that great sickle saved for one day’s work,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When He who sowed shall reap Creation’s field;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past those high diademed orbs which show to man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His crown to come;⁠—up through the starry strings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of that high harp close by the feet of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which He, methought, took up and struck, till Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In love’s immortal madness, rang and reeled;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars fell on their faces; and, far off,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wild world halted⁠—shook his burning man⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then, like a fresh-blown trumpet blast, went on,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like a god gone mad. On, on we flew,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I and the spirit, far beyond all things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of measure, motion, time and aught create;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where the stars stood on the edge of the first nothing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And looked each other in the face and fled⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past even the last long starless void, to God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom straight I heard, methought, commanding thus:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal! I am God. Hie back to earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And say to all, that God doth say⁠—Love God!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God visits men adreaming: I, awake.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And my dream changed to one of general doom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt hear it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, say on! It is but a dream.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God made all mind and motion cease; and, lo!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The whole was death and peace. An endless time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Obtained, in which the power of all made failed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God bade the worlds to judgment, and they came⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pale, trembling, corpse-like. To the souls therein</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then spake the Maker: Deathless spirits, rise!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight they thronged around the throne. His arm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Almighty then uplift, and smote the worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once, and they fell in fragments like to spray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vanished in their native void. He shook</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars from Heaven like rain-drops from a bough;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like tears they poured adown creation’s face.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit and space were all things. Matter, death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And time, left even not a wake to tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where once their track o’er being. God’s own light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Undarkened and unhindered by a sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glowed forth alone in glory. And through all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dear and tremulous sense of God prevailed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the blush of love upon the cheek,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the full feeling lightening through the eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the quick music in the chords of harps.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God judged all creatures unto bliss or woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to their deeds, and faith, and His</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Own will: and straight the saved upraised a voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which seemed to emulate eternity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In its triumphant overblossedness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lost leapt up and cursed God to His face⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A curse might make the sun turn cold to hear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thee, in all thy burning glory, tremble,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In front of all thine angels, like a chord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rage writhed each brow into a changeless scowl.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Madly they mocked at God, and dared His eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Safe in their curse of deathlessness. To Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They hied like storms; and, cursing all things, each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soul wrapped him in his shroud of fire for aye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With one long loud howl which seemed to deafen Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then I woke.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A wild fantastic dream!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mere mirage of mind! Come, let us leave:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We have seen enough of this world.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lift me up then!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>World upon world how they come rolling on!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But none that I see are so fair as earth:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is so much to love that is purely earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now I could wander all day in the wood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where nature, like a sibyl, writes the fate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all that live on her red forest leaves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And have no other aim than wandering</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within that wood, and wind my arms around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its grey gaunt trunks, and think and feel to them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While the wind, sinking moans over the earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a giant over some dead captive dame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom death had saved from madness and his love;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could tramp across the brown and springy moor,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And over the purple ling, and never tire;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could look upon the ripple of a river,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or on a tree’s long shadow down a hill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For a whole summer’s day, wishing the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would drink my soul up to him as he draws</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dew from the earth. These things are in my mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And suns and systems cannot drive them out.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dost ravage a these worlds?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, all mine own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where spirit is, there evil; and the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is full of me as ocean is of brine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God is all perfect; man imperfect. Thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am the imperfection of the whole⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pitch profoundest of the fallible.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Myself the all of evil which exists⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ocean heaped into a single surge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O God! why wouldst Thou make the universe?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Child! quench yon suns; strip death of its decay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men of their follies⁠—Hell of all its woe!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These, if thou didst, thou couldst not banish me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am the shadow which Creation casts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From God’s own light.⁠—But here we are, at Hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hark to the thunderous roaring of its fires!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet ere we further pass⁠—stop! dost thou shrink?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>At nought⁠—not I! Come on, fiend! follow me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
