<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Heaven.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Eternity hath snowed its years upon them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the white winter of their age is come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The World and all its worlds; and all shall end.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Seraphim</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span>God! God! God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As flames in skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We burn and rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lose ourselves in Thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Years on years!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And nought appears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save God to be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God! God! God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To us no thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath Being brought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Toward Thee that doth not move!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Years on years!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what appears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save God to love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God! God! God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All Thou dost make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lies like a lake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Below Thine infinite eye:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Years on years!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all appears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save God to die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cherubim</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span>As sun and star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How high or far,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Show but a boundless sky;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So creature mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all confined</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To show Thee, God, most High!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun still burns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun still turns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound, round himself and round;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So creature mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To self’s confined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Thou God hast no bound!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Systems arise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or a world dies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each constant hour in air;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But creature mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heaven confined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lives on like Thee, God! there.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr class="together">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Seraphim<br/>
						Cherubim</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span>God! God! God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou fill’st our eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A were the skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One burning, boundless sun!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While creature mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In path confined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passeth a spot thereon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God! God! God!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye thrones of Heaven, how bright, how pure ye are!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How have ye brightened since I saw ye first!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How have I darkened since ye saw me last!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is the dark abyss of fire, and what</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ravenous heights of air, o’er which I reign,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In agony of glory, to these seats?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The loathsome cavern of the oracle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er which ye rise in templed majesty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Filled with the incense of all worshippers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And echoing with the eloquence of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which rolls in sunny clouds around the heavens.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet must I work through world and life my fate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And winding through the wards of human hearts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Steal their incarnate strength. Death does his work</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In secret and in joy intense, untold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though an earthquake smacked its mumbling lips</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er some thick peopled city. But for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exists nor peace nor pleasure, even here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all beside, the very faintest thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is rapture. I will speak to God as erst.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Father of spirit, as the sun of air!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beginning of all ends, and end of all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beginnings, throughout whole Eternity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From whom Eternity and every power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perfect, and pure cause, is and emanates!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Originator without origin!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>End without end! Creator of all ages,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sabbath of all Being; who hast made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All numbers sacred, who art all and one!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At whose right hand the wisdom of all worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Combined, is only fearful foolishness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or inarticulate madness⁠—and Thou, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Maker and Perfecter of all, the one!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Being above all Being, God the Life!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who art the way whereon the world proceeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From God, all-making, and whereby returns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ever generated universe!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who rulest all worlds in the law of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy nature and their own; who art before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All ages, angels, blessed, times and worlds!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Word that in every world art safe to save</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All souls, impregned with spirit, God-begot!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Thou eternal spirit-Deity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sanctifier of the universe!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Being, and Life, and spirit, who dost make,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destroyest, recreatest, makest God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God one and Trine! Thou seest me here again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still, sunlike, though eclipsed, of blinding power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fiery cause, and everness of ill;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold I bow before Thee; hear Thou me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What wouldst thou, Lucifer?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is a youth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Among the sons of men I fain would have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Given up wholly to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He is thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tempt</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I thank Thee, Lord!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Upon his soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast no power. All souls are mine for aye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I do give thee leave to this that he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May know my love is more than all his sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And prove unto himself that nought but God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can satisfy the soul He maketh great.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou God art all in one! Thy infinite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bounds Being. Thou hast said the world shall end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is perfect, as concerns itself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all its parts and ends; not as towards Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So man is Likest and unlikest God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all existence; therefore doth as much</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Resemble Thee as any act a mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In him of whom I ask, I seek once more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tempt the living world, and then depart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Holy Ghost</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I will hallow him to the ends of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That though he plunge his soul in sin like a sword</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In water, it shall nowise ding to him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is of Heaven. All things are known in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere aimed at upon earth. The child is chosen.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span class="i2">Another soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">The Holy one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath chosen out of earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And there is none</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Throughout the whole</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like worthy of his birth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guardian Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! who hath joy like mine? was I not here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When from Thy boundless bosom, as a star</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the air, that soul was kindled, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And given to me to guard and guide⁠—while both,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mid starry strains out of the depths of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell at Thy feet in worship?⁠—joy of joys!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To you, ye saints and angels, let me speak;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ye I see rejoice with me. Ye know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What ’tis to triumph o’er temptation, what</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fall before it; how the young spirit faints⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The virgin tremor, the heart’s ebb and flow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When first some vast temptation calmly comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And states itself before it, like the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Low looming in the west, above the wave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of wimpling streamlet, ere its waters grow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To size aortal. Than the Fiend himself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no greater evil. Less the shame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of yielding, more the glory of conquering,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In him, to whom he goes, this soul elect.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From infancy through childhood, up to youth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I this soul attended; marked him blest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the sweet and sacred ties of life;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The prayerful love of parents, pride of friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prosperity, and health and ease, the aids</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of learning, social converse with the good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gifted, and his heart all-lit with love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the rolling sea with living light;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hopeful and generous and earnest; rich</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In commune with high spirits, loving truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wisdom for their own divinest selves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tracking the deeds of the world’s glory, or</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Conning the words of wisdom, Heaven-inspired,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As on the soul, in pure effectual ray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright, transparent atoms, thought by thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fall fixed for evermore. And thus his days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through sunny noon, or mooned eve, or night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Star-armied, shining through the deathless air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All radiantly elapsed, in good or joy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All this, for long, I marked. There grew, at length,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A change within his spirit; and I feared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A fatal and a final fall from good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s love seemed lost upon him. He became</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heart-deadened. Watching, warning, vain, I fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hither to intercede with God our Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bless him with salvation. We may plead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alway for those we love, by leave divine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor knew I till this moment, with all Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That, in the righteous providence of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That soul was saved. Thou knowest, Lord! the mould</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mortals, and the infinite end whereto</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The souls Thou savest are predestinate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! be Thy mercy mighty to this soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fiend-threatened; nor permit him who presides</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er Hell’s eternal holocaust, too far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tempt or tamper with the heart of man!⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My mercy doth outstretch the universe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall it not be sufficient for one soul?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am the wrath of God unto myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And made by Him to do my part Do thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine! they are far enough apart I ween.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guardian Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The heaven-strung chords of man’s immortal soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not for thee to wither at thy will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bear witness, all ye blessed, to the word;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Angels, intelligences, sons of God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye who know nought but truth, feel nought but love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will nought but bliss, do nought but righteousness!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose life was ere the Heavens were conceived,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars begotten, or the ages born;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye many ordered hierarchies, which are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love, truth, justice, majesty and might,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dominion, glory, wisdom, bliss of God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye through whose ministry of mercy⁠—His</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immediate, ever instant, active, all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirits and worlds are governed⁠—age by age</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gazing and gaining glory; ye who stand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stirless, before the throne, entranced in joy;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or ye, whose life is to present all souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reborn to their Creator; or to search</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden globed skies for deeds of grace;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ye who move all Heavens, in whose names</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The name of God is, as in angels’ all;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The crown, the wisdom, the intelligence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Kindness, and strength and beauty, splendour, worth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Original and rule; and ye who move</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Restless around the throne, the burning seven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The virtue, power, salvation, fire and rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blessing and praise of God; and ye who rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Regions or kingdoms, states, tribes, families,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ages and times, and seasons, and events;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Systems and elements, material powers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mental and spiritual; or ye who bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Souls from the heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye tenants of the archetypal worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And spiritual spheres; and you, ye saints!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freed once on earth into the liberty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the necessity which is of God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yours are the many multitudes of stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bliss and power for ever, ye are gods!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And live an endless life, bespoken here;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bear witness, all, that happiness succeeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To godliness; and that, despite of sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world may recognise in all time’s scenes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though belts of clouds bar half its burning disk,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The overruling, overthrowing power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which by our creature purposes works out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its deeds, and by our deeds its purposes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God! for thy glory only can I act,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for thy creatures’ good. When creatures stray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farthest from Thee, then warmest towards them burns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy love, even as yon sun beams hotliest on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earth when distant most.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The earth whereon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He dwells, this grain selected from the sands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of life, dies with him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God! I go to do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy will.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou, too, who watchest o’er the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose end I fix, prepare to have it judged.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me not then have watched o’er it in vain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From age to age, from hour to hour I still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have hoped it would grow better⁠—hope so now;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis better than it once was, and hath more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mind and freedom than it ever had.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love it more than ever. Thou didst give</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It to me as a child. To me earth is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as the boundless universe to Thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, more! for Thou couldst make another. It is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My world. Take it not from me Lord! Thou, Christ!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mad’st it the altar where thou offeredst up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thyself for the creation. Let it be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal as Thy love. And altars are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Holy; and sister angels, sister orbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hail it afar as such. Oh! I have heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>World question world and answer; seen them weep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each other if eclipsed for one red hour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And of all worlds most generous was mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tenderest and the fairest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Knowest thou not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s son to be the brother and the friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of spirit everywhere? Or hath thy soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Been bound for ever to thy foolish world?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Star unto star speaks light, and world to world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Repeats the password of the universe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To God; the name of Chrifet⁠—the one great word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well worth all languages in earth or Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Think not I lived and died for thine alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that no other sphere hath hailed me Christ.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My life is ever suffering for love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In judging and redeeming worlds is spent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine everlasting being.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Earth he next</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will judge; for so saith God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be it not, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art a God of goodness and of love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is the evil of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And loveth not the earth, Thy Son, nor Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou knowest best.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold now all yon worlds!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The space each fills shall be its successor.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accept the consolation!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Earth! oh, Earth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis earth shall lead destruction; she shall end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars shall wonder why she comes no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On her accustomed orbit, and the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Miss one of his eleven of light; the moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An orphan orb, shall seek for earth for aye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through time’s untrodden depths and find her not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more shall morn, out of the holy east,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stream o’er the amber air her level light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor evening, with the spectral fingers, draw</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her tar-sprent curtain round the head of earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her footsteps never thence again shall grace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blue sublime of heaven. Her grave is dug.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I see the stars, night-clad, all gathering</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In long and dark procession. Death’s at work.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, one by one, shall all yon wandering worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether in orbed path they roll, or trail,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In an inestimable length of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their golden train of tresses after them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cease; and the sun, centre and sire of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The keystone of the world-built arch of heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be left in burning solitude. The stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which stand as thick as dewdrops on the fields</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of heaven, and all they comprehend, shall pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirits of all worlds shall all depart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To their great destinies; and thou and I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Greater in grief than worlds, shall live as now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In hell’s dark annals there is something writ,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which shall amaze man yet There! to thy earth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is a blind world, yet unlit by God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rolling around the extremest edge of light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all things are disaster and decay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The outcast of all being; no one thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fitting another: that is fit for thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be that thy world I but not the living earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stretch forth Thy shining shield, oh God! the heavens,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over the prostrate earth, an armed friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And save her from the swift and violent hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her beauty hath enchanted! from the wrath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of love like his, oh save her, though by death!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Destruction and salvation are the hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the face of time. When both unite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The day of death dawns. Every orb exists</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto its preappointed end: and earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My creature, the elect of worlds, ere all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is saved. The world shall perish as a worm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon destruction’s path; the universe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Evanish like a ghost before the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea like a doubt before the truth of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet nothing more than death shall perish. Then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoice ye souls of God, regenerate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye indwellers divine of Deity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Him ye are immortal as Himself!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O’er all things are eternity and change,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And special predilection of our God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou who createst souls, as the sun clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the sea of spirit, sire of both</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The first and second natures of Thy Son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In whom the maker and the made make one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deific spirit! who in every world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Payeth creation’s penalties; in all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is heir of God and nature, and in Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in self-worship, Deifies himself!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And you blest spirits for whom I died, for whom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forefated, fore-atoned for from the first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All heaven reserves the fullness of its bliss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creator and created! witness, both,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How I have loved ye, as God-natured life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone can love and suffer! Let the earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every orb, the offspring of all air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perish; but all I die for, live for me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The earth shall not be when her sabbath ends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the high close of order.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Heaven, farewell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell is more bearable than nothingness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Thrones</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou, God, art Lord of mercy! and Thy thoughts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are high above the star-dust of the world!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dominations</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet o’er the meanest atom reignest Thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Omnipotent, as o’er the universe!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Powers</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy might is self-creative, and Thy works,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal, temporal, destructible,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are ever in Thy sight and blessed there!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heavens are Thy bosom, and Thine eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is high o’er all existence; yea the worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are but Thy shining foot-prints upon space!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princedoms</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Eternal Lord! Thy strength compels the worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bows the heads of ages; at Thy voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their unsubstantial essence wears away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Virtues</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All-favouring God! we glory but in Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye Heavens exalt, expand yourselves! they come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The infinite generations, all Divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Deity, our brethren and our friends!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangels</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou who hast thousand names, as night hath stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which light Thee up to eye create, yet not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One thousandth part illumine Thy boundlessness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor that abyss of Being ’midst of which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy countless wonders constellate themselves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy light, the light we dwell in shall at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fulfil the universe, and all be bliss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The consummation of all ages come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We praise Thee for Thy mercies, and for this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The first, and last, and greatest of all boons.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span>Thee God! we praise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through our ne’er sunsetting days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Thy just ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Divine:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Thy hand is every spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the meed the same may merit;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All which all the worlds inherit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are Thine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not unto creatures given</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To scale the purposes of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alway just and kind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But before Thy mighty breath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life and spirit, dust and death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The boundless All is driven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like clouds by wind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of Earth</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:hymn">
							<p>
								<span>Woe! woe at last in Heaven!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth to death is given;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ends of things hang still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over them as a sky;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do what we will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All’s for eternity!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
