<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A gathering of kings and peoples.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throned.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Princes and Peoples! Powers once, of earth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It suits not that I point to ye the path</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By which I reached this sole supreme domain⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This mountain of all mortal might. Enough</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am monarch of the world⁠—the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let all acknowledge loyally my laws,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And love me as I them love! It will be best.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No rise against me can stand. I rule of God;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am God’s sceptre here. Think not the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is greater than my might⁠—less than my love⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or that it stretcheth further than mine arm!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kings! ye are Kings no longer. Cast your crowns</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here⁠—for my footstool. Every power is mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nobles! be first in honour. Ye, too, lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your place, in place: retrieve yourselves, in good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peoples! be mighty in obedience.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let each one labour for the common weal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be every man a people in his mind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kings⁠—nobles⁠—nations! love me and obey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I need no aid⁠—no arms. Burn books⁠—break swords!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world shall rest, and moss itself with peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand forth, and speak, sole servant of my throne!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If aught thou hast to settle and explain⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or send away these nations to their homes.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye mighty once⁠—ye many weak, give ear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I and my god⁠—for god he sure must be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In human form, who sitteth there enthroned⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For readier rule, and for the good of all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have cast again the dynasties of earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to the courses of the air:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore, from east, and west, and north, and south,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Four element-like ministers shall bend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before his feet. Hearken, thou unkinged crowd!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye have not sought the good of those ye governed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The people only for the people care.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye seem to have thought earth but a ball for kings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To play with: rolling the royal bauble, empire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now east⁠—now west. Your hour and power is past.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye are the very vainest of mankind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As loftiest things weigh lightest. Ye are gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nations, away with them! Nor do ye boast!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye find that power means not good, not bliss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But ye would wed delusion:⁠—now, ye know her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she is yours for life⁠—and death⁠—and judgment.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no power, nor majesty, save his:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His is the kingdom of the world and glory.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His throne is founded centre-deep by Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the whole earth doth bless him. Unto all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He hath laid out one perfect level law⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His will. For as the people cannot rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Themselves, so neither may a crowd of kings:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hence hath been the evil of the earth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now ceased for ever. War will be no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His is the sway of social sovereign peace:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His tyranny is love and good to all:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His is the vice-royed, vouched-safe sway of God:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he will turn the world, at will; as light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turneth the world round. Greet your Lord, and go!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Depart, ye nations!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hark! thou fiend! dost hear?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay! it is the death groan of the sons of men⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy subjects⁠—King!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why hadst thou this so soon?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is God who brings it all about⁠—not I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am not ready⁠—and⁠—it shall not be!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot help it, monarch! and⁠—it is!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast not had time for good!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One day⁠—perchance.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then hold that day as an eternity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All around me die. The earth is one great death-bed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! save me, Festus! I have fled to thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through all the countless nations of yon dead⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For well I knew it was thou who sattest there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To die with thee, if that thou art not Death:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, if thou wert, I would not shrink from thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am thine own, own Clara!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art safe!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here in the holy chancel of my hearts⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heavenly end of this our fleshly fane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hold thee to communion. Rest thee safe!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men thought I was an angel, as I passed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And caught up at my feet⁠—but I ’scaped all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I knew⁠—I was sure, that I should die by thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart is a true oracle⁠—I knew it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then there is faith among these mortals yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy beauty cometh first, and goeth last⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Willow-like. Welcome!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I am so happy!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I speak of thee as of the dead; the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are alway faithful.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will stay with thee⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though angels beckon⁠—may I? Let me, love!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I dare not⁠—cannot, take mine eyes from thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fear of looking on the dead. Dear Festus!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art the only one hast answered me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love to love⁠—life to life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I am dying!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give me one kiss⁠—the kiss of life and death⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The only taste of earth I will take to Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here! let me die, die in it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dies.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Last and best!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now am I one, again. Oh! memory runs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To madness, like a river to the sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Happy as Heaven have I been with thee, love!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine innocent heart hath passed through a pure life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a white dove, wing-sunned through the blue sky.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A better heart God never saved in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She died as all the good die⁠—blessing⁠—hoping.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are some hearts, aloe-like, flower once, and die:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hers was of them. Ah! all life hath ceased.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And silence reads the dead world’s burial tale.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Death sits quivering, there, and watering,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His great gaunt jaw at me. When must I die?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say! dost thou feel to be mortal, or immortal?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Away!⁠—and let me die alone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I will come again: but spare thee, now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hour to think⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>On all things. God, my God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hour to sum a life’s iniquities!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hour to fit me for eternity⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make me up for judgment and for God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only one hour to curse thee! Nay, for that,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There may be endless hours. God! I despair⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I am dying. Let me hold my breath!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know not if I ever may draw another.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I feel Death blowing hard at the lamp of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart feels filling like a sinking boat;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It will soon be down⁠—down. What will come of me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is as I always wished it;⁠—I shall die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In darkness, and in silence, and alone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even my last wish is petted. God! I thank Thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the earnest of Thy coming⁠—what?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgiveness? Let it be so: for I know not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What I have done to merit endless pain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is pleasure crime? Forbid it, God of bliss!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who spurn at this world’s pleasures, lie to God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And show they are not worthy of the next.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What are Thy joys we know not⁠—nor can we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come near Thee, in Thy power, nor truth, nor justice;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ute nearest point wherein we come towards Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is loving⁠—making love⁠—and being happy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wilt not chronicle our sandlike sins;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For sin is small, and mean, and barren. Good,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only, is great, and generous, and fruitful.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Number the mountains, not the sands, O God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God will not look as we do on our deeds;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor yet as others. If He more condemn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall He not more approve? A few fair deeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bedeck my life, like gilded cherubs on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A tomb, beneath which lie dust, decay, and darkness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But each is better than the other thinks.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thank God! man is not to be judged by man:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, man by man, the world would damn itself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What do I see? It is the dead. They rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In clouds! and clouds come sweeping from all sides.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upwards to God: and now they are all gone⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gone, in a moment, to eternity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But there is something near me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Spirit</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go on! I follow, when it is my time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no shadow on the face of life:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the noon of fate. Why may not I die?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methinks I shall have yet to slay myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am calm now. Can this be the same heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, when it did sleep, slept from dizziness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pure rapidity of passion, like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The centre circlet of the whirlpool’s wheel?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earth is breaking up; all things are thawing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>River and mountain melt into their atoms;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A little time, and atoms will be all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sea boils; and the mountains rise and sink</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like marble bubbles, bursting into death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O thou hereafter! on whose shore I stand⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Waiting each toppling moment to engulf me⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What am I? Say, thou Present!⁠—say, thou Past!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye three wise children of Eternity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A life?⁠—a death?⁠—and an immortal?⁠—all?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is this the threefold mystery of man?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lower, darker Trinity of earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is vain to ask. Nought answers me⁠—not God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The air grows thick and dark. The sky comes down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun draws round him streaky clouds, like God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gleaning up wrath. Hope hath leapt off my heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And overturned it. I am bound to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, why wilt Thou not save? The great round world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath wasted to a column beneath my feet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will hurl me off it, then; and search the depth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of space, in this one infinite plunge!⁠—Farewell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To earth, and Heaven, and God! Doom! spread thy lap!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I come⁠—I come!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forbear!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am God’s!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Man, die!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
