<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Wood and water⁠—Sunset.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>, alone.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This is to be a mortal and immortal!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To live within a circle⁠—and to be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That dark point where the shades of all things around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Meet, mix and deepen. All things unto me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shew their dark sides! somewhere there must be light.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! I feel like a seed in the cold earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quickening at heart, and pining for the air!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passion is destiny. The heart is its own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fate. It is well youth’s gold rubs off so soon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart gets dizzy with its drunken dance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the voluptuous vanities of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enchain, enchant, and cheat my soul no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My spirit is on edge. I can enjoy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nought which has not the honied sting of sin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That soothing fret which makes the young untried,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Longing to be beforehand with their nature,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In dreams and loneness cry, they die to live;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That wanton whetting of the soul, which while</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It gives a finer, keener edge for pleasure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wastes more and dulls the sooner. Rouse thee, heart;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bow of my life thou yet art full of spring!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My quiver still hath many purposes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet what is worth a thought of all things here?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How mean, how miserable every care!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How doubtful, too, the system of the mind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then the ceaseless, changeless, hopeless round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of weariness and heartlessness and woe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vice and vanity! Yet these make life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The life at least I witness if not feel.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No matter! we are immortal. How I wish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I could love men! for amid all life’s quests</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There seems but worthy one⁠—to do men good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It matters not how long we live but how.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For as the parts of one manhood while here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We live in every age: we think and feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feed upon the coming and the gone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As much as on the now time. Man is one:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he hath one great heart. It is thus we feel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With a gigantic throb athwart the sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each others’ rights and wrongs; thus are we men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us think less of men and more of God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sometimes the thought comes swiftening over us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a small bird winging the still blue air;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then again, at other times, it rises</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slow, like a cloud which scales the skies all breathless,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And just over head lets itself down on us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sometimes we feel the wish across the mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rush, like a rocket tearing up the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That we should join with God and give the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The slip: but while we wish, the world turns round,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And peeps us in the face⁠—the wanton world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We feel it gently pressing down our arm⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The arm we had raised to do for truth such wonders;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We feel it softly bearing on our side⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We feel it touch and thrill us through the body⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we are fools and there’s an end of us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis a fine thought that sometime end we must.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There sets the sun of suns! dies in all fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Asher’s death-great monarch. God of might!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We love and live on power. It is spirit’s end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind must subdue. To conquer is its life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why mad’st Thou not one spirit, like the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To king the world? And oh! might I have been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That sun-mind, how I would have warmed the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love and worship and bright life!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Suddenly appearing.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not thou!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hadst thou more power die more wouldst thou misuse.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who art thou, pray? I saw thee not before.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It seems as thou hadst grown out of the air.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou knowest me well. Though stranger to thine eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not to thy heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know thee not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come nearer! Look on me! I am above thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath thee, and around thee, and before thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, art thou all things, or dost go through all?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A spirit, or embodied blast of air?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I feel thou art a spirit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea I am.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew it! I am glad, yet tremble so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What hours upon hours have I longed for this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hoped that thought or prayer might produce!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have besought the stars, with tears, to send</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A power unto me; and have set the clouds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until I thought I saw one coming: but</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadowy giant alway thinned away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I was fated unimmortalized.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What shall I do? Oh! let me kneel to thee!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, rise! and I’ll not say, for thine own sake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou dost pray in private to the Devil.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Father of lies thou liest!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am he!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is enough to make the Devil merry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To think that men call on me momently,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deeming me ever dungeoned fast in Hell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swearers and swaggerers jeer at my name;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And oft indeed it is a special jest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With witling gallants. Let me once appear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe’s me! they faint and shudder⁠—pale and pray;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The burning oath which quivered on the lip,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Starts back and sears and blisters up the tongue;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confusion ransacks the abandoned heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quells the bold blood, and o’er the vaulted brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slips the white woman-hand. To judgment, ho!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very pivot of the earth seems snapped;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And down they drop like ruins to repent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such be the bravery of mighty man!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I must be mad; or mine eye cheats my brain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And this strange phantom comes from overthought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the white lightning from a day too hot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It must be so. But I will pass it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Stay!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh save me God! He is reality!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And now thou kneel’st to Heaven. Fye, graceless boy!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mocking thy Maker with a cast-off prayer;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For had not I the first fruits of thy faith?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tempter, away! From all the crowds of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why single me? Why score the young green bole</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fellage? Go! Am I the youngest, worst?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No! Light the fires of hell with other souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine shall not burn with thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou judgest harshly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can I not touch thee without slaying thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why art thou here? What wouldst thou have with me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Fore all I would have gentle words and looks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I pray thee, go!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot quit thee yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But why so sad? Wilt kneel to me again?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This leafy closet is most apt for prayer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes; I will pray for thee and for myself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Waste not thy prayers! I scatter them: they reach</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No further than thy breath⁠—a yard or so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as for me, I heed them, need them not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My nature God knows and hath fixed; and He</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Recks little of the manners of the world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wicked He holdeth it and unrepentant.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Therefore the more some ought to pray.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To blow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A kiss, a bubble and a prayer hath like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Effect and satisfaction.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me hence!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go tell thy blasphemies and lies elsewhere.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou scatter prayer! Make me Thy minister</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One moment God! that I may rid the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever of its evil. Oh! Thine arm!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Canst rid thyself?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas no. Get thee gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can nought insult thee nor provoke thy flight?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I laugh alike at ruin and redemption.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am the one which knows nor hope nor fear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which ne’er knew good nor e’er can know the worst.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What thinkest thou can anger me, or harm?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wherefore didst thou quit Hell? To drag me there?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou wilt not guess mine errand. Deem’st thou aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which God hath made all evil? Me He made.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft I do good; and thee to serve I come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did I not hear thee boast with thy last breath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not to have known what good was?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know it not; yet God’s will I must work.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I come I say to serve thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well! I would</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou never hadst: but speak thy purpose straight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I heard thy prayer at sunset. I was here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I saw, thy secret longings, unsaid thoughts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which prey upon the breast like night-fires on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A heath. I know thy heart by heart. I read</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tongue when still as well as when it moves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou didst pray to God. Did He attend?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or turn His eye from the great glass of things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherein He worshippeth eternally</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Himself, to thee one moment? He did not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tell thee nought He cares for men. I came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And come to proffer thee the earth; to set</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee on a throne⁠—the throne of will unbound⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To crown thy life with liberty and joy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make thee free and mighty even as I am!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I would not be as thou art for Hell’s throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Add Earth’s⁠—add Heaven’s!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew thy proud high heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To test its worth and mark I held it brave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In shape and being thus myself I came;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not in disguise of opportunity⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not as some silly toy which serves for most⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not in the mask of lucre, lust nor power⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not in a goblin size nor cherub form⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But as the soul of Hell and evil came I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With leave to give the kingdom of the world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hie freedom of thyself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good; prove thy powers.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Do I not prove them? Who but I, that have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal might o’er mine own mind, and o’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All hearts and spirits of the living world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would share it with another, or forgo,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hour, the great enjoyment of the whole?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And who but I give men what each loves best?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Open the Heavens and let me look on God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Open my heart and let me see myself!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then I’ll believe thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou shalt not believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that I give thee, hut for that I am.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Believe me first; then I will prove myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though sick I know thee of the joys of sense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet those thou lovest most I will make pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And render worthy of thy love; unfilm them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That so thou mayst not dally with the blind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt possess them to their very souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pleasure and love and unimagined beauty;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All, all that be delicious, brilliant, great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of worldly things are mine, and mine to give.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What can be counted pleasure after love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the young lion which hath once lapped blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart can ne’er be coaxed back to aught else.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will sublime it for thee all to bliss:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As yet it hath but made thee wretched.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not bliss I seek; I care not for it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am above the low delights of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The life I live is in a dark cold cavern,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where I wander up and down, feeling for something</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is to be⁠—and must be⁠—what, I know not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the incarnation of my destiny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is nigh.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is thy fate which weighs upon thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Necessity sits on humanity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the world on Atlas neck. ’Tis this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the sultry sense of overdrawn life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worm of the world hath eaten out my heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will renew it in thee. It shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bosom favourite of every beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even like a rosebud. Thou shalt render happy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By naming who may love thee. Come with me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have a love on earth, and one in Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou shalt love ten as others love but one!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I was glad when something in me said</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, let us worship beauty! and I bowed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And went about to find a shrine; but found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None that my soul, when seeing, said enough, to.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many I met with where I put up prayers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And had them more than answered; and at such</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I worshipped, partly because others did;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Partly because I could not help myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But none of these were for me; and away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I went champing and choking in proud pain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a burning wrath that not a sea could slake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I betook me to the sounding sea;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And overheard its slumberous mutterings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of a revenge on man; whereat almost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I gladdened, for I felt savage as the sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had only one thing to behold, the sea;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had only one thing to believe, I loved;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until that lonesome sameness grew sublime</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And darkly beautiful as death, when some</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bright soul regains its star-home, or as Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just when the stars falter forth, one by one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the first words of love from a maiden’s lips.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are points from which we can command our life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the soul sweeps the future like a glass;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And coming things, full freighted with our fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Jut out, dark, on the offing of the mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let them come! Many will go down in sight;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the billow’s joyous dash of death go down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At last came love; not whence I sought nor thought it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As on a ruined and bewildered wight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rises the roof he meant to have lost for ever.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On came the living vessel of all love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Terrible in its beauty as a serpent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rode down upon me like a ship full sail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bearing me before it, kept me up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spite of the drowning speed at which we drave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On, on, until we sank both. Was not this love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, how can I tell? I am not in love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I have oft times heard mine angels call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most piteously on their lost loves in Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as I suffer, I have seen them come;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seen starlike faces peep between the clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Hell become a tolerable torment.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some souls lose all things but the love of beauty;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by that love they are redeemable;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For in love and beauty they acknowledge good;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And good is God⁠—the great Necessity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have not told thee half I will do for thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All secrets thou shalt ken⁠—all mysteries construe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At nothing marvel. All the veins which stretch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unsearchable by human eyes, of lore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most precious, most profound, to thine shall bare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vulgar lie like dust. The world within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world above thee, and the dark domain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine own thou shalt o’er rule; and he alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who rightly can esteem such high delights,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He only merits⁠—he alone shall have.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And if I have shall I be happier?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is pleasure? What, happiness?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I vouchsafe to thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Am I tempted thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto my fall?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God wills or lets it be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How thinkest thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That I will go with thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From God I come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I do believe thee, spirit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He will not let thee harm me. Him I love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thee I fear not. I Obey Him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both time and case are urgent. Come away!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Give me a breathing-time to fortify,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within myself, the promise I have made.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Expect me, then, at midnight, here. Remember,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou canst any time repent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, true. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Repentance never yet did aught on earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It undoes many good things. Of all men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heaven shield me from the wretch who can repent!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
