<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A country town⁠—Marketplace⁠—Noon.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These be the toils and cares of mighty men!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth’s vermin are as fit to fill her thrones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As these high Heaven’s bright seats.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men’s callings all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are mean and vain; their wishes more so: oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The man is bettered by his part or place.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How slight a chance may raise or sink a soul!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What men call accident is God’s own part.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He lets ye work your will⁠—it is His own:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that ye mean not, know not, do not, He doth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is life worth without a heart to feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The great and lovely, and the poetry</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sacredness of things? for all things are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sacred⁠—the eye of God is on them all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hallows all unto it. It is fine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To stand upon some lofty mountain-thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feel the spirit stretch into a view;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To joy in what might be if will and power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For good would work together but one hour.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet millions never think a noble thought:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But with brute hate of brightness bay a mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which drives the darkness out of them, like hounds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throw but a false glare round them, and in shoals</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They rush upon perdition: that’s the race.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What charm is in this world-scene to such minds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blinded by dust? What can they do in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A state of spiritual means and ends?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus must I doubt⁠—perpetually doubt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who never doubted never half believed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where doubt there truth is⁠—’tis her shadow. I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Declare unto thee that the past is not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have looked over all life, yet never seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The age that had been. Why then fear or dream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>About the future? Nothing but what is, is;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Else God were not the Maker that He seems,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As constant in creating as in being.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Embrace the present! Let the future pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Plague not thyself about a future. That</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only which comes direct from God, His spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is deathless. Nature gravitates without</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Effort; and so all mortal natures fall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deathwards. All aspiration is a toil;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But inspiration cometh from above,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And is no labour. The earth’s inborn strength</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could never lift her up to yon stars, whence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She fell; nor human soul, by native worth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Claim Heaven as birthright, more than man may call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cloudland his home. The soul’s inheritance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its birth-place, and its death-place, is of earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until God maketh earth and soul anew;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The one like Heaven, the other like Himself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So shall the new Creation come at once;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sin, the dead branch upon the tree of Life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be cut off for ever; and all souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Concluded in God’s boundless amnesty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou windest and unwindest faith at will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What am I to believe?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou mayst believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that which thou art forced to.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That instinct of immortal life in me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which prompts me to provide for it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Perhaps.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Man hath a knowledge of a time to come⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His most important knowledge: the weight lies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nearest the short end; and the world depends</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon what is to be. I would deny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The present, if the future. Oh! there is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A life to come, or all’s a dream.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May be a dream. Thou seest in thine, men, deeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clear, moving, full of speech and order; then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why may not all this world be but a dream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God’s? Fear not! Some morning God may waken.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I would it were. This life’s a mystery.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The value of a thought cannot be told;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But it is clearly worth a thousand lives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like many men’s. And yet men love to live</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if mere life were worth their living for.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What but perdition will it be to most?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life’s more than breath and the quick round of blood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is a great spirit and a busy heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The coward and the small in soul scarce do live.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One generous feeling⁠—one great thought⁠—one deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of good, ere night, would make life longer seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than if each year might number a thousand days⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spent as is this by nations of mankind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts, not breaths;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In feelings, not in figures on a dial.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who thinks most⁠—feels the noblest⁠—acts the best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life’s but a means unto an end⁠—that end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beginning, mean and end to all things⁠—God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dead have all the glory of the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why will we live and not be glorious?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We never can be deathless till we die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the dead win battles. And the breath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of those who through the world drive like a wedge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tearing earth’s empires up, nears death so close</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It dims his well-worn scythe. But no? the brave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Die never. Being deathless, they but change</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their country’s arms for more⁠—their country’s heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give then the dead their due; it is they who saved us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rapid and the deep⁠—the fall, the gulf</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have likenesses in feeling and in life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And life, so varied, hath more loveliness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In one day than a creeping century</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sameness. But youth loves and lives on change</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till the soul sighs for sameness; which at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Becomes variety, and takes its place.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet some will last to die out thought by thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And power by power, and limb of mind by limb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like lambs upon a gay device of glass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till all of soul that’s left be dry and dark;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till even the burden of some ninety years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath crashed into them like a rock; shattered</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their system as if ninety suns had rushed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ruin earth⁠—or Heaven had rained its stars;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till they become, like scrolls, unreadable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throught dust and mould. Can they be cleaned and read?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do human spirits wax and wane like moons!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The eye dims and the heart gets old and slow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lithe limb stiffens, and the sun-hued locks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thin themselves off, or whitely wither;⁠—still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ages not spirit, even in one point,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immeasurably small; from orb to orb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In ever rising radiance, shining like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun upon the thousand lands of earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look at the medley, motley throng we meet!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some smiling⁠—frowing some; their cares and joys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alike not worth a thought⁠—some sauntering slowly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if destruction never could o’ertake them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some hurrying on as fearing judgment swift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should trip the heels of Death and seize them living.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Grief hallows hearts even while it ages</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And much hot grief, in youth, forces up life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With power which too soon ripens and which drops. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A funeral passes.</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose funeral is this ye follow, friends?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Would ye have grief, let me come! I am woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mourner</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We want no grief: Festus! she died of grief.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did ye say she died? oh! I knew her then.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Set down the body; let toe look upon her!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, Son of God! what dost Thou now in heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While one so beautiful lies earthening here?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will give up the future for the past;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The winged spirit and the starry home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If Thou wilt let her live, and make me love.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mourner</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She was a lock of Heaven which Heaven gave earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And took again, because unworthy of her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Her air was an immortal’s; I have seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stars look on it with feeling; and her eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherever she went, it won her way like wine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men bowed to it as to the lifted Host.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How could I be so cruel? Who but I?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now, corruption, come; sit; feast thyself!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is the choicest banquet thou hast been at.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art my happier, only rival: thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who takest love from the living⁠—life from beauty⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beauty from death⁠—whole robber of the world!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mourner</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The moment after thou desertedst her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cloud came over the prospect of her life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I foresaw how evening would set in,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Early and dark and deadly. She was true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did I not love thee too? pure! perfect thing!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This is a soul I see and not a body.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, beauty, Test for aye; go, starry eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lips like rosebuds peeping out of snow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, breast love-filled as a boat’s sail with wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaping from wave to wave as leaps a child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thoughtless o’er grassy graves; go, locks, which have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden embrownment of a lion’s eye!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet one more look; farewell, thou well and fair!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All who but loved thee shall be deathless. Nought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Named but with thee can perish. Thou and Death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have made each other purer, lovelier, seem,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like snow and moonlight. Never more for thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let eyes be swollen like streams with latter rains!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To die were rapture having lived with thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy soul hath passed out of a bodily Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into a spiritual. Rest for aye!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pure as the dead, in life; the dead are holy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would I were among them. Let us pass!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Living is but a habit; and I mean</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To break myself of it soon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Too soon thou canst not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men heed not of the day, how nigh none knows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which brings the consummation of the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in my ear the old machine already</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Begins to grate. They would not credit warning,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or I would up and cry, Repent! I will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here is a fair gathering and I feel moved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mortals, Repent! the world is nigh to its end;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On its last legs and desperately sick.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See ye not how it reels round all day long?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boys</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! here’s a ranter. Come, here’s fun. Amen!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know the church service by heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bystander</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be off!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You’ll serve the church by keeping out of it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am a preacher come to tell ye truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tell ye too there is no time to be lost;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So fold your souls up neatly, while ye may;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Direct to God in Heaven; or some one else</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May seize them, seal them, send them⁠—you know where.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world must end. I weep to think of it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But you, you laugh! I knew ye would. I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men never will be wise till they are fools</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever. Laugh away! The time will come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When tears of fire are trickling from your eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye will blame yourselves for having laughed at me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I warn ye, men: prepare! repent! be saved!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I warn ye, not because I love, but know ye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God will dissolve the world, as she of old</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her pearl, within His cup and swallow ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In wrath: although to taste ye would be poison,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And death and suicide to aught but God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again I warn ye. Save himself who can!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do ye not oft begin to seek salvation?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You? you? and fail, as oft, to find? Sink? Cease?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shall I tell ye, brethren, why ye fail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once and for ever? why, there is no past;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the future is the fiction of a fiction;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The present moment is eternity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is that ye have sucked corruption from the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like milk from your own mothers: it is in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your soul-blood and your soul-bones. Earth does not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wean one out of a thousand sons to Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beginnings are alike: it is ends which differ.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One drop falls, lasts, and dries up⁠—but a drop;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another begins a river: and one thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Settles a life, an immortality:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that one thought ye will not take to good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now I will tell ye just one other truth:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye hate the truth as snails salt⁠—it dissolves ye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Body and soul⁠—but I don’t mind. So, now:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up to this moment ye are all, each, damned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What are ye now? still damned! It will be the same</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To-morrow⁠—and the next day⁠—and the next:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till some fine morning ye will wake in fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye see I do not mince the truth for ye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Belike ye think your lives will dribble out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As brooks in summer dry up. Let us see!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Try: dike them up: they stagnate⁠—thicken⁠—scum.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That would make life worse than death. Well, let go!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where are ye then? for life, like water, will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find its last level: what level? The grave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is but a fall of five feet after all;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That cannot hurt ye; it is but just enough</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To work the wheel of life; so work away!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye may think that I do not know the terms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And treasures whereupon ye live so high.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I know more than most men, modestly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speaking. I know I am lost, and ye too. God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could only save me by destroying me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that I have no advantage over you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And therefore think ye will the rather bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One of your own state to advise for ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now don’t you envy me, good folks, I pray⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Envy’s a coal comes hissing hot from hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twill be such coals will burn ye by the way.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your other preachers first think they are safe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now I say, broadly, I am the worst among ye;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God knows I have no need to wrong myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor you. I boast not of it, but as truth:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is little to be proud of, credit me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is salvation? What is safety? Think!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who wants to know? Does any?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Crowd</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All of us.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I will not tell ye. You shall wait until</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some angel come and stir your stagnant souls:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then plunge into yourselves and rise redeemed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, I’ll unroll your hearts and read them to ye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To say ye live is but to say ye have souls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That ye have paid for them and mean to play them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till some brave pleasure wins the golden stake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rakes it up to death as to a bank.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye live and die on what your souls will fetch;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all are of different prices: therefore Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cannot well bargain for mankind in gross;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But each soul must be purchased, one by one.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This it is makes men rate themselves so high:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While truly ye are worth little: but to God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye are worth more than to yourselves. By sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye wreak your spite against God⁠—that ye know:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And knowing, will it. But I pray, I beg,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Act with some smack of justice to your Maker,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If not unto yourselves. Do! It is enough</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make the very Devil chide mankind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such baseness, such unthankfulness! Why he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thanks God he is no worse. You don’t do that.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I say be just to God. Leave off these airs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know your place⁠—speak to God⁠—and say, for once,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go first, Lord! Take your finger off your eye!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It blocks the universe and God from sight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think ye your souls are worth nothing to God?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are they so small? What can be great with God?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What will ye weigh against the Lord? Yourselves?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring out your balance: get in, man by man:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Add earth, heaven, hell, the universe; that’s all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God puts his finger in the other scale,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And up we bounce, a bubble. Nought is great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor small with God⁠—for none but He can make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The atom indivisible, and none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But He can make a world: He counts the orbs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He counts the atoms of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And makes both equal⁠—both are infinite.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Giving God honor, never underrate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yourselves: after Him ye are everything</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But mind! God’s more than everything; He is God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what of me? No, us? no! I mean the Devil?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why see ye not he goes before both you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God? Men say⁠—as proud as Lucifer⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pray who would not be proud with such a train?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath he not all the honor of the earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why Mammon sits before a million hearths</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where God is bolted out from every house.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well might He say He cometh as a thief;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For He will break your bars and burst your doors</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which slammed against Him once, and turn ye out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Roofless and shivering, ’neath the doom-storm; Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall crack above ye like a bell in fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bury all beneath its shining shards.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He calls: ye hear not. Lo! he comes⁠—ye see not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No; ye are deaf as a dead adder’s ear:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No; ye are blind as never bat was blind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With a burning bloodshot blindness of the heart;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A swimming, swollen senselessness of soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Listen! Whom love ye most? Why him to whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye in your turn are dearest. Need I name?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh no! But all are devils to themselves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every man his own great foe. Hell gets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only the gleanings; earth hath the full wain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hell is merry at its harvest home.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But ye are generous to sin and grudge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gleaners nothing; ask them, push them in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let not an ear, a grain of sin be lost;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gather it, grind it up; it is our bread:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We should be ashamed to waste the gifts of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why is the world so mad? Why runs it thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Having and howling round the universe?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because the Devil bit it from the birth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fault is all with him. Fear nothing, friends!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is fear which beds the far to-come with fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the sun does the west: but the sun sets;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well; still ye tremble⁠—tremble, first at light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then darkness. Tremble! ye dare not believe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, cowards! sooner than believe ye would die;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Die with the black lie flapping on your lips</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the soot-flake upon a burning bar.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be merry, happy if ye can: think never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of him who slays your souls, nor Him who saves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is, time enough for that when ye are a-dying.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Keep your old ways! It matters not this once.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be brave! Ye are not men whom meat and wine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Serve to remind but of the sacrament;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom sweet shapes, and tantalizing smiles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring up the Devil and the ten commandments⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so on⁠—but I said the world must end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am sorry; it is such a pleasant world:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all it faults it is perfect⁠—to a fault:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And you, of course, end with it. Now how long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will the world take to die? I know ye place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great faith upon death-bed repentances;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The saddener the better. I know ye often</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Begin to think of praying and repenting;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But second thoughts come and ye are worse than ever;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As over new white snow a filthy thaw.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye do amaze me verily. How long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will ye take heart on your own wickedness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God’s forbearance? Have ye cast it up?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come now; the year and month, day, hour and minute,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sin’s golden cycle. Do ye know how long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exactly Heaven will grant ye? how long God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who when he had slain the world and wasted it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hung up His bow in Heaven, as in his hall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A warrior after battle⁠—will yet bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tour contumely and scorn of His best gifts⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man’s mockery of man? But never mind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some of us are magnificently good,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hold the head up high like a giraffe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You, in particular, and you⁠—and you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Good men are here and there, I know; but then⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You must excuse me if I mention this⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My duty is to tell it you⁠—the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a black block of marble, jagged with white,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As with a vein of lightning petrified,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looks blacker than without such; looks in truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So gross the heathen, gross the Christian too⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the original darkness of void space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hardened. Instead of justice, love and grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each worth to man the mission of a God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Injustice, hate, uncharitableness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triequal reign round earth, a Trinity of Hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye think ye never can be bad enough:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as ye sink in sin, ye rise in hope.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let the worst come to the worst, you say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There always will be time to turn ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cry for half an hour or so to God:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Salvation, sure, is not so very hard⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It need not take one long; and half an hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is quite as much as we can spare for it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We have no time for pleasures. Business! business!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No! ye she perish sudden and unsaved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The priest shall, dipping, die. Can man save man?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is water God? The counsellor, wise fool!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drop down amid his quirks and sacred lies⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The judge, while dooming unto death some wretch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall meet at once his own death, doom, and judge.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The doctor, watch in hand, and patient’s pulse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall feel his own heart cease its beats⁠—and fall:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Professors shall spin out, and students strain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their brains no more; art, science, toil shall cease.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world shall stand still with a rending jar,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though it struck at sea. The halls where sit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heads of nations shall be dumb with death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ship shall after her own plummet sink,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sound the sea herself and depths, of death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At the first turn Death shall cut off the thief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dash the gold bag in his yellow brain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gambler, reckoning gains, shall drop a piece;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stoop down and there see death;⁠—look up, there God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wanton, temporizing with decay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And qualifying every line which vice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Writes bluntly on the brow, inviting scorn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall pale through plastered red: and the loose, low sot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See clear, for once, through his misty, o’erbrimmed eye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The just, if there be any, die in prayer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death shall be every where among your marts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And giving bills which no man may decline⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drafts upon Hell one moment after date.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then shall your outcries tremble amid the stars:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Terrors shall be about ye like a wind:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fears come down upon ye like a house.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yon man looks frightened.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then it is time to stop.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hope I have done no good. He will soon forget</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His soul. Flesh soaks it up as sponge does water.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now wait! I will rub them backwards like a cat;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And you shall see them spit and sparkle up.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us suppose a case, friends! You are men;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there is God! and I will be the Devil.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Very well. I am the Devil.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">One</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Says.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think you are.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You look as if you lived on buttered thunder.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, be not wroth. Ye would crucify the Devil,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I do believe, if he a moment vexed you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know well which ye choose: but choose again!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time or eternity? Speak, Hell or Heaven?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Crowd</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He’s a mad ranter: down with him!⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let him be!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Stand by me, Festus, and I will by thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why, God and man! this is the second time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I have run for my life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, nay, come back!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They will not harm thee: they would chair thee round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The market-place, knew they but whom thou art.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Peace, there my friends! one minute; let us pray!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant us, oh God! that in thy holy love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The universal people of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May grow more great and happy every day;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mightier, wiser, humbler, too, towards Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that all ranks, all classes, callings, states</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of life, so far as such seem right to Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May mingle into one, like sister trees,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so in one stem flourish:⁠—that all laws</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And powers of government be based and used</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In good and for the people’s sake;⁠—that each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May feel himself of consequence to all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And act as though all saw him;⁠—that the whole,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mass of every nation may so do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is most worthy of the next to God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For a whole people’s souls, each one worth more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than a mere world of matter, make combined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A something godlike⁠—something like to Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We pray thee for the welfare of all men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let monarchs who love truth and freedom feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The happiness of safety and respect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From those they rule, and guardianship from Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let them remember they are set on thrones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As representatives, not substitutes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of nations, to implead with God and man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let tyrants who hate truth, or fear the free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know that to rule in slavery and error,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the mere ends of personal pomp and power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is such a sin as doth deserve a hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To itself sole. Let both remember, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are but things like-natured with all nations;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That mountains issue out of plains, and not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Plains out of mountains, and so likewise kings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are of the people, not the people of kings.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let all feel, the rulers and the ruled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All classes and all countries, that the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is Thy great halidom; that Thou art King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lord! only owner and possessor. Grant</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That nations may now see, it is not kings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor priests they need fear so much as themselves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That if they keep but true to themselves, and free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sober, enlightened, godly⁠—mortal men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Become impassible as air, one great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And indestructible substance as the sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let all on thrones and judgment-seats reflect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How dreadful Thy revenge through nations is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On those who wrong them; but do Thou grant, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That when wrongs are to be redressed, such may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be done with mildness, speed, and firmness, not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With violence or hate, whereby one wrong</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Translates another⁠—both to Thee abhorrent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bells of time are ringing changes fast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant, Lord! that each fresh peal may usher in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An era of advancement, that each change</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prove an effectual, lasting, happy gain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we beseech Thee, overrule, oh God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All civil contests to the good of all;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All party and religious difference</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To honourable ends, whether secured</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or lost; and let all strife, political</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or social, spring from conscientious aims,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And have a generous self-ennobling end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man’s good and Thine own glory in view always!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The best may then fail and the worst succeed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alike with honour. We beseech Thee, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For bodily strength, but more especially</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the soul’s health and safety. We entreat Thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In thy great mercy to decrease our wants,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And add autumnal increase to the comforts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which tend to keep men innocent, and load</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their hearts with thanks to Thee as trees in bearing:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blessings of friends, families, and homes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And kindnesses of kindred. And we pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That men may rule themselves in faith in God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In charity to each other, and in hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of their own souls’ salvation:⁠—that the mass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The millions in all nations may be trained,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From their youth upwards, in a nobler mode,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To loftier and more liberal ends. We pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above all things, Lord! that all men be free</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From bondage, whether of the mind or body;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bondage of religious bigotry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bald antiquity, servility</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thought or speech to rank and power; be all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Free as they ought to be in mind and soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As well as by state-birthright;⁠—and that Mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time’s giant pupil, may right soon attain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Majority, and speak and act for himself!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Incline Thou to our prayers, and grant, oh Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all may have enough, and some safe mean</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of worldly goods and honours, by degrees,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take place, if practicable, in the fitness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fullness of Thy time. And we beseech Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Truth no more be gagged, nor conscience dungeoned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor science be impeached of godlessness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor faith be circumscribed, which as to Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the soul’s self affairs is infinite;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that all men may have due liberty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To speak an honest mind, in every land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Encouragement to study, leave to act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As conscience orders. We entreat Thee, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Thy Son’s sake to take away reproach</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all kinds from Thy church, and all temptation</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of pomp or power political, that none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May err in the end for which they were appointed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To any of its orders, low or high;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no ambition, of a worldly cast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaven the love of souls unto whose care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They feel propelled by Thy most holy spirit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be every church established, Lord! in truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let all who preach the word, live by the word,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In moderate estate; and in Thy church⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One, universal, and invisible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>World-wards, yet manifest unto itself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May it seem good, dear Saviour, in Thy sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That orders be distinguished, not by wealth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But piety and power of teaching souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Equalise labour, Lord! and recompence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let not a hundred humble pastors starve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In this or any land of Christendom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While one or two, impalaced, mitred, throned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And banqueted, burlesque if not blaspheme</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The holy penury of the Son of God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fastings, the footwanderings, and the preachings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Christ and His first followers. Oh that the Son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might come again! There should be no more war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more want, no more sickness; with a touch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He should cure all disease, and with a word,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All sin; and with a look to Heaven, a prayer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Provide bread for a million at a time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But till that perfect advent grant us, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all good institutions, orders, claims,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Charitably proposed, or in the aid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Thy divine foundation, may much prosper,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And more of them be raised and nobly filled;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Thy word may be taught throughout all lands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And save souls daily to the thrones of Heaven!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we entreat Thee, that all men whom Thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast gifted with great minds may love Thee well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And praise Thee for their powers, and use them most</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Humbly and holily, and, lever-like,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Act but in lifting up the mass of mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>About them; knowing well that they shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Questioned by Thee of deeds the pen hath done,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or caused, or glozed; inspire them with delight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And power to treat of noble themes and things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worthily, and to leave the low and mean⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Things born of vice or day-lived fashion, in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their naked native folly:⁠—make them know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fine thoughts are wealth, for the right use of which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men are and ought to be accountable⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If not to Thee, to those they influence:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant this we pray Thee, and that all who read,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or utter noble thoughts, may make them theirs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thank God for them, to the betterment</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of their succeeding life;⁠—that all who lead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The general sense and taste, too apt, perchance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be led, keep in mind the mighty good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They may achieve, and are in conscience, bound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And duty, to attempt unceasingly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To compass. Grant us, All-maintaining Sire!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all the great mechanic aids to toil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man’s skill hath formed, found, rendered⁠—whether used</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In multiplying works of mind, or aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To obviate the thousand wants of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May much avail to human welfare now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in all ages, henceforth and for ever!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let their effect be, Lord! to lighten labour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And give more room to mind, and leave the poor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some time for self-improvement. Let them not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be forced to grind the bones out of their arms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For bread, but have some space to think and feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like moral and immortal creatures. God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have mercy on them till such time shall come;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look Thou with pity on all lesser crimes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thrust on men almost when devoured by want,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wretchedness, ignorance and outcast life!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have mercy on the rich, too, who pass by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The means they have at hand to fill their minds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With serviceable knowledge for themselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fellows, and support not the good cause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the world’s better future! Oh, reward</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All such who do, with peace of heart and power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For greater good. Have mercy, Lord! on each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all, for all men need it equally.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May peace and industry and commerce weld</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into one land all nations of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rewedding those the Deluge once divorced.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! may all help each other in good things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mentally, morally, and bodily!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vouchsafe, kind God! Thy blessing to this isle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Specially! May our country ever lead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world, for she is worthiest; and may all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Profit by her example, and adopt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her course, wherever great, or free, or just.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May all her subject colonies and powers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have of her freedom freely, as a child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Receiveth of its parents. Let not rights</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be wrested from us to our own reproach,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But granted. We may make the whole world free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And be as free ourselves as ever, more!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If policy or self-defence call forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our forces to the field, let us in Thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Place, first, our trust, and in Thy name we shall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’ercome, for we will only wage the right.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us not conquer nations for ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for Thee, Lord! who hast predestined us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fight the battles of the future now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so have done with war before Thou comest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till then, Lord God of armies, let our foes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have their swords broken and their cannon burst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And their strong cities levelled; and while we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>War faithfully and righteously, improve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Civilize, christianize the lands we win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From savage or from nature, Thou, oh God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt aid and hallow conquest, as of old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine own immediate nation’s. But we pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all mankind may make one brotherhood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And love and serve each other; that all wars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feuds die out of nations, whether those</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom the sun’s hot light darkens, or ourselves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom he treats fairly, or the northern tribes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom ceaseless snows and starry winters blench,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Savage or civilized⁠—let every race,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bed, black or white, olive, or tawny-skinned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Settle in peace and swell the gathering hosts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the great Prince of Peace! Oh! may the hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soon come when all false gods, false creeds, false prophets⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Allowed in Thy good purpose for a time⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Demolished, the great world shall be at last,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mercy-seat of God, the heritage</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Christ, and the possession of the Spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The comforter, the wisdom! shall all be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One land, one home, one friend, one faith, one law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its ruler God, its practice righteousness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its life peace! For the one true faith we pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is but one in Heaven and there shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But one on earth, the same which is in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prophecy is more true than history.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant us our prayers, we pray, Lord! in the name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for the sake of Thy Son Jesus Christ,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our Saviour and Redeemer, who with Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with the Holy Spirit, reigneth God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over all worlds, one blessed Trinity!⁠⸺⁠</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Crowd</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Amen!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, friends, we’ll sing a hymn; then part.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I give it out, and you sing⁠—all of you.</span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
								<p>
									<span>Oh! Earth is cheating Earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">From age to age for ever;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She laughs at faith and worth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And dreams she shall die never;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Never, never, never!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dreams she shall die never.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And Hell is cursing Hell</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">From age to age for ever;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Its groans ring out the knell</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of souls that may die never;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Never, never, never!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of souls that may die never.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>But Heaven is blessing Heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">From age to age for ever;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And its thanks to Qod are given</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">For bliss that can die never;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Never, never, never!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For bliss that can die never.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>
								<span>My blessing be upon ye all; now go!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I wonder what these people make of thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, manner’s a great matter.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They deserve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All the rebuke thou gavest them and more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What mountains of delusion men have reared!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How every age hath bustled on to build</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its shadowy mole⁠—its monumental dream!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How faith and faney, in the mind of man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have spuriously mingled, and how much</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall pass away for aye, as pass before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon son, the Lord of steadfastness and change,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The visionary landscapes of the skies;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden capes far stretching into Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The snow-piled cloud-crags, the bright winged isles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which dot the deep, impassive, ocean air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a disbanded rainbow, of all hues,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fit for translated fairy’s Paradise;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or as before the eye of musing child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The faces Fancy forms in clouds and fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of glowing angel or of darkening fiend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arts, superstition, arms, philosophy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have each in turn possessed, betrayed, and mocked us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yes, vain philosophy, thine hour is come!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy lips were lined with the immortal lie,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dyed with all the look of truth. Men saw,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Believed, embraced, detested, cast thee off.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those lights, the morn of Truth’s immortal day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As thou didst falsely swear them, have they not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vanished, the mere auroras of the mind?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou didst vow to gather clear again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fallen waters of humanity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To smooth the flaw from out an eye; to piece</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A pounded pearl. Thank God! I am a man;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not a philosopher! Rivers may rot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never revive the root of oak firebolted.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, let us to the hills! where none but God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can overlook us; for I hate to breathe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The breaths and think the thoughts of other men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In close and clouded cities, where the sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Frowns like an angry Father mournfully.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love the hills and I love loneliness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And oh! I love the woods, those natural fanes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose very air is holy; and we breathe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God; for He doth come in special place,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, while we worship, He is there for us!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is time that something should be done for the poor.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sole equality on earth is death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, rich and poor are both dissatisfied.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am for judgment: that will settle both.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing is to be done without destruction.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death is the universal salt of states;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blood is tbe base of all things⁠—law and war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I could tame this lion age to follow me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I should like to macadamize the world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The road to Hell wants mending.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come away!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
