<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-29" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Elsewhere.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alone.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I feel as if I could devour the days</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till the time came when I shall gain mine end;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God shall have made me ruler, and all worlds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Signed the sublime recognizance. Till then⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even as a boat lies rocking on the beach,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Waiting the one white wave to float it free,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wait I the great event;⁠—too great it seems.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, Lord, thou knowest that the power I seek</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is but for others’ good and Thine own glory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the desire for it inspired by Thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So use me as I use it. Thou hast passed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy word that such I shall enjoy, and then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mission is accomplished in this world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I go unto another, where all souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Begin again, or take, up life from where</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Death broke it at. I cannot think there will be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like disproportion there between our powers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will, as here; if not, I shall be happy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I feel no bounds. I cannot think but thought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On thought springs up, illimitably, round,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As a great forest sows itself; but here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is nor ground nor light enough to live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could I, I would be every where at once,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like the sea, for I feel as if I could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spread out my spirit o’er the endless world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And act at all points:⁠—I am bound to one.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must be here, and there, and everywhere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I am nowhere. Sense, flesh, fueling, fail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the feet of the imperious mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To which they are but as the dust she treads⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Windlike treads o’er, uplifts and leaves behind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How mind will act with body glorified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spiritualized, and senses fined,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pointed brilliantwise, we know not. Here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even, it may be wrong in us to deem</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The senses degradations, otherwise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than as fine steps, whereby the Queenly soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes down from her bright throne to view the mass</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She hath dominion over, and the things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of her inheritance; and reascends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With an indignant fiery purity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to be touched, her seat. The visible world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereby God maketh Nature known to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not derogatory to Himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the pure Spirit Infinite. A world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is but, perhaps, a sense of God’s, by which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He may explain His nature, and receive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit pleasure. But the hour is hard at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Time’s grey wing shall winnow all away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The atoms of the earth, the stars of Heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the created and Creator mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall know each other, worlds and bodies both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put off for aye; man and his Maker meet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where all, who through the universe do well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embrace their heart’s desire; what things they will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whom remember; live, too, where they list;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the beings they love best, and God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inherit and inhabit boundless bliss.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear me, all-favouring God! my latest prayer;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou unto whom all nations of the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lift up their hearts, like grass-blades to the sun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou who hast all things and hast need of nought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou who hast given me Earth and all it holds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me, from out Thy garner stored with good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some sign, Lord! while I live, in proof to earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My prayers are with Thee; that they rend the clouds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, rising through the sightless dark of space,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reach to Thy central throne. Oh! let me feel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What was my constant dream in my young years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is in all my better moments now⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My hope, my faith, my nature’s sum and end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oneness with Thee and Heaven. Lord! make me sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul already is in unison</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the triumphant. Ah! I surely hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The voices of the spirits of the saints,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And witnesses to the Redeeming Truth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not, as of old, in scanty scattered strains,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breathed from the caves of earth and cells of cities⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor as the voice of martyr choked with fire⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in one solemn Heaven-pervading hymn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of happiness impregnable, as when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the bright walls of the Son’s city they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Looked on the war of Hell, host upon host,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Foiled by God’s single sword before their gates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of perfect pearl;⁠—nearer and nearer now!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the sign, O God! which Thou hast given,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will praise Thee through Eternity.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">The Saints</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">From Heaven.</i>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
								<p>
									<span>Call all who love Thee, Lord, to Thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Thou knowest how they long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leve these broken lays, and aid</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In Heaven’s unceasing song;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How they long, Lord, to go to Thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And hail Thee with their eyes⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee in Thy blessedness, and all</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The nations of the skies;</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>All who have loved Thee and done well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of every age, creed, clime,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The boat of saved ones from the ends</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And all the worlds of time:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wise in matter and in mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The soldier, sage, and priest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King, prophet, hero, saint, and bard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The greatest soul and least;</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>The old and young and very babe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The maiden and the youth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All re-born angels of one age⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The age of Heaven and truth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rich, the poor, the good, the bad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Redeemed, alike, from sin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord! close the book of time, and let</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Eternity begin.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Will ye away, ye blessed ones? To God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I then commend ye, and my soul with yours.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And midst the light in which ye live, oh! mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all the sunless days and starless nights</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which myriads pass on earth, and pray for them!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! pray for those who in the world’s dark womb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are bound, Who know not yet their Father, God!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lord of all earth, all worlds, all Heaven! lift up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My spirit to Thy glory! Let me share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The comfort of Thy love, and while ordained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the great task I have to go through, let</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more misgivings, fears, nor mortal doubts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the cold dew of darkness chill the soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which Thou hast hallowed with Thy love, and which,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like molten gold within its mould, hath made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The thing that holds it precious;⁠—or if, Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Thine own purpose, Thou wilt suffer such,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May they pass quick and perish tracelessly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, too, all thoughts of earth and pangs of death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May I o’ercome at last, and with Thy chosen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seraphs and saints, and all-possessing souls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which minister unto the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enthroned in spirit and intensest bliss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Succeed to Heaven for ever.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guardian Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mortal, hear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul once saved shall never cease from bliss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor God lose that He buyeth with His blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She doth not sin. The deeds which look like sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flesh and the false world, are all to her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hallowed and glorified. The world is changed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She hath a resurrection unto God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While in the flesh, before the final one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And is with God. Her state shall never fail.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even the molten granite which hath split</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mountains, and lieth now like curdled blood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In marble veins, shall flow again when comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heat which is to end all; when the air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is as a ravening fire, and what at first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Produced, at last consumeth; but the soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Redeemed is dear to God as His own throne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shall no sooner perish. Hearken, man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt thou distrust God? Doubt on doubt no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prepare thee for the power and lot sublime</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereto the Lord hath called thee. He hath heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The prayers with which thou hast entreated Him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bids me tell thee, shrink not, doubt not. He</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will comfort and uphold thee at the end;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For after God the Chooser, God the Slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cometh the God of Comfort to the heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose action and effect is ministrant</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever after⁠—consummating all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I fear, I fear this miracle of Death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is something terrible. But go to God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou angel, and declare that I repent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all misdeeds; that but for His own grace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I should repent of my whole life; that on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That grace, which now hath sanctified the whole,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I trust for all the rest of it, and then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever; that I am prepared to act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And suffer as He bids, and in all things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To do His will rejoicing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is done.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! I repent me of a thousand sins,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In number as the breaths which I have breathed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I forgiven?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Child of God, thou art.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is God prompts, inspires, and answers prayer;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not sin, nor yet repentance, which avails:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And none can truly worship but who have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earnest of their glory from on high⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s nature in them. The world cannot worship.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And whether the lip speak, or in inspired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Silence we clasp our hearts as a shut book</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of song unsung, the silence and the speech</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is each His; and as coming from and going</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Him, is worthy of Him and His Love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prayer is the spirit speaking truth to Truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The expiration of the thing inspired.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I go. Thy God is with thee. We shall meet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again in Heaven, no more to part</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis sweet to feel we are encircled here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By breath of angels as the stars by Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the soul’s own relations, all divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As kind as even those of blood;⁠—and thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While friends and kin, like Saturn’s double rings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cheer us along our orbit, we may feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are not lone in life, but that earth’s part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Heaven and all things. Praise we, therefore God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O all ye angels, pray and praise with us!⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
