<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-33" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Hades.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Death</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Almighty God! sustain me. This is Death;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And this⁠—I knew not, angel! he was here⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is Lucifer⁠—the fallen, like a bolt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thunder forged in intramundane air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Self-buried in the centre. Lucifer!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wake from thy sealike sleep; in peace or wrath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rouse from thine age-long trance; arise and see;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The representatives of earth and Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stand by thee. As for me, I blame no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The part thou tookest in my mortal life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis gone⁠—nor spurn thee for delusions dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blood that hath been spilled is sunk in earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And run into the rivers, and dried up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the air;⁠—and there’s an end of it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What good hath come of it alone I bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At heart. And we have both offended God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let me, though not in nature to forget,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive, what every one hath sometime felt⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Devil’s burning gripe upon his heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I see thee with compassion, half with hope.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mortal! I bow to thee, arid would do to</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The least and lowest spirit God hath made:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But still the curse that I am cursed with</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Outlasts the elements⁠—outlives all time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All curses cease with time; all ill, all woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blessings star forth for ever; but a curse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is like a cloud⁠—it passes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas by him⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon angel, only not almighty, there!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As with a chain of mountains I was bound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hurled into this unformed nebulous life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stripped of all might when mightiest, struck down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While triumphing the loftiest⁠—enslaved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When most a monarch o’er both earth and hell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And made a shadow among shadows here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It recks not. Let the impenetrable soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be ground as through a mill, I only know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In action or inaction equal woe⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suffering, doing, being, one extreme.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pass on! we meet again!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And when we do,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May God forgive, as I!⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold there, Death!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throned on his tomb⁠—entombed in his throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just as he ceased he rests for aye⁠—his scythe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still wet out of its bloody swathe, one hand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tottering sustains; the other strikes the cold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drops from his bony brow: his mouldy breath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tainteth all air.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I dread him now no more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not hate. He is a vanquished enemy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Listen! he speaks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Death</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To you, ye sons of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My latest words I utter. Unto him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who ever lives, and hath for aye destroyed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Me and my reign, give ye this crown usurped,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lay it at His feet; and this dulled dart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was my sceptre. To the conqueror</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Belong these trophies. All the progeny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of time will soon cease. Lo! the end’s at hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thus shall it be, O Death! and thus it is.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And who are these gigantic awful shades</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which fill the midst⁠—the present of the place?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These are the mighty nothings man of old</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made; the dread unrealities by whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He swore, to whom he prayed, and at whose shrines</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He sacrificed a thousand times a day:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His brother falsehoods these, men like himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which mere imagination changed to gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some for their good deeds, others for their bad:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bel, Odin, Bramh and Zeus, the Lords of death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fire, and judgment, waiting here their death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fiery judgment⁠—Time and Titan⁠—war⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beauty, and strength, and Light, and the long roll</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of creatural powers and passions Deified;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who gave their names to stars which still roam round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The skies, all worshipless, even from climes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where their own altars once topped every hill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jove</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Before the Christian cross and Muslim mosque</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My marble fanes have fallen, and my shrines</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shrunk like a withered hand ages ago.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now all signs and sacred domes for gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To dwell in are extinct. The world is all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One Temple of the Truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bramh</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The ages feigned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That made Time groan to think how old he was,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Deities in millions are no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ageless eternity and God the sole,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The royalty of Heaven, is at hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boodh</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All things that are shall nothing be at last,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save what’s resolvable in Deity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And all these lesser shades, which move like moons,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Half-darkened by the greater⁠—half-illumed⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are priests and prophets of the mightier ones?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They are;⁠—and further round thine eye can mark,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The myriads of adorers of each god,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confused and prostrate, as their souls awake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the demoniac madness of their creeds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold! they kneel to those they hailed on earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As makers⁠—as omnipotent⁠—eterne⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cry for help, for comfort; none have they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give to others or themselves. The false,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The base, the brutish Deities give way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all their sacred follies in their train,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the earthquake truth, engulphing all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe to the false gods, woe! to prophet, priest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worshipper, all woe!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hark! round the earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each soul hath found a tongue and uttereth woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! from their thrones the man-made gods descend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rend their robes and trample on their crowns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hurl away their sceptres. Woe to all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gods and idols of the heart of man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their sun is set for ever in the night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was ere Light was. Surely it is more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be true man or woman than false god</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And falser prophet. God alone the true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The God of Heaven, shall be witnessed to</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worshipped.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Witnessed, worshipped, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By all: the faithful and the faithless⁠—saint</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sinner.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo! the nations of the dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which do outnumber all earth races, rise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And high in sumless myriads over head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweep past us in a cloud, as ’twere the skirts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the Eternal passing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">A Voice</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Souls, arise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To deathless life!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis God speaks. Let us hence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The general judgment is in hand⁠—God’s hand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The souls of those whom God loves circle us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thee, thy lot thou knowest. As a seed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Buried in earth doth multiply itself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full fifty fold, so will thy nature when</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Changed, it lifts head in the air divine of Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Out of the depths of earth and the world’s womb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine unborn angels seek thee, God, all Love!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now is Thine hour for which all hours were made,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All life created, all things else ordained;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be it the hour of mercy, Lord! to all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Thy Son’s sake, who, for the sake of man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came down from Heaven into the pit of earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lived as one of us and died;⁠—He died</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The death of all at once of every age;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world’s accumulated weight of woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From its first life unto its last, which none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the Omnipotent could bear⁠—He bore;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all for us. God became man that man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might become God. Oh, favour infinite!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now reap the righteous, righteous but in Him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Any, their guerdon. Evil to repay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With good was Christs command, and earth with Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is thus the great example of His word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough for sinners this, for all which live.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do Thou, Lord! be with us. In Thee we live;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our treasure, trust and triumph is in Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold the day of our salvation come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto the countless all Thou hast redeemed!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ages sweep around me with their wings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like angered eagles cheated of their prey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ages of all time: the glowing Heavens</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are rushing to receive us. Oh, rejoice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All ye that are immortal⁠—and whate’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath been predestined to eternal end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The day determined ere all time was dawns!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
