<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-28" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A library and balcony⁠—A summer night.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alone.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The last high upward slant of sun on the trees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a dead soldier’s sword upon his pall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seems to console earth for the glory gone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh! I could weep to see the day die thus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The death-bed of a day, how beautiful!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Linger, ye clouds, one moment longer there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fan it to slumber with your golden wings!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like pious prayers ye seem to soothe its end.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It will wake no more till the all-revealing day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When, like a drop of water, greatened bright</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into a shadow, it shall show itself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all its little tyrannous things and deeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unhomed and clear. The day hath gone to God⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Straight, like an infant’s spirit, or a mocked</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mourning messenger of grace to man.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would it had taken me too on its wing!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My end is nigh. Would I might die outright!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And slip the coil without waiting its unwind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who that hath lain lonely on a high hill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the imperious silence of full noon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With nothing but the clear dark sky about him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like God’s hand laid upon the head of earth⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But hath expected that some natural spirit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should start out of the universal air⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gathering his cloudy robe around him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As one in act to teach mysterious things,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Explain that he must die?⁠—that having got</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As high as earth can lift him up⁠—as far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above that thing, the world, as flesh can mount⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the tyrant wind, and the clouded lightning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the round rainbow⁠—and that having gained</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A loftier and a more mysterious beauty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of feeling⁠—something like a starry darkness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seizing the soul⁠—say he must die⁠—and vanish?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who hath not, at such moments, felt as now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I feel, that to be happy we must die?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here I rest⁠—above the world and its ways;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wind, opinion⁠—and the rainbow, beauty⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the thunder, superstition⁠—I am free</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all:⁠—save death, what want I to be happy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall I leave no trace, then, of my life?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The soul begetteth shadows of itself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which do outlive their author: and are more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Substantial than all nature, and the red</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Realities of flesh and blood, as echo</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is longer, louder, further than the voice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of man can thunder, or his ear report.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And oft the world hath Deified its echoes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A year!⁠—and who shall find them? Can it be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mind’s works have been deathless⁠—not the mind?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or will the world’s immortals die with me?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sages, and the heroes, and the bards⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose verse set to the thunder of the seas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seems as immortal as their ceaseless music!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O God! I fain would deem Thou livest not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that this world hath sprung up from chance seed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unknown to thee; and is not reckoned on.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hell solves all doubts.⁠—Come to me, Lucifer!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo! I am here: and ever prompt when called for.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How speed thy general pleasures?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bravely! joys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are bubble-like⁠—what makes them, bursts them, too.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, like the milky way, there! dim with stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul that numbers most will shine the less.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No matter⁠—mind it not!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet, joys of earth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That ye should ruin spirits is too hard.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who can avoid ye? who can say ye nay?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or take his eyes from off ye? who so chaste?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They have well-nigh unimmortalized myself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet have they nought to sate the pining spirit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which doth enamour immortality.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No! they are all base, impure, ruinous⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The harlots of the heart. Forgive me, God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am getting too forlorn to live⁠—too waste.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aught that I can or do love, shoots by me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a train upon an iron road. And yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I need not now reproach mine arm or aim;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I have winged each pleasure as it flew,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How swift or high soever in its flight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We cannot live alone. The heart must have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A prop without, or it will fall and break.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But nature’s common joys are common cheats.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As he who sails southwards, beholds, each night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>New constellations rise, all dear, and fair;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, o’er the waters of the world, as we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reach the mid zone of life, or go beyond,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beauty and bounty still beset our course;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>New beauties wait upon as every where;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>New lights enlighten and new worlds attract.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bat I have seen and I have done with all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Friendship hath passed me like a ship at sea;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have seen no more of it. I had</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A friend with whom, in boyhood, I was wont</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To learn, think, laugh, weep, strive, and love, together;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For we were alway rivals in all things⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Together up high springy hills, to trace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A runnel to its birthplace⁠—to pursue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A river⁠—to search, haunt old ruined towers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And muse in them⁠—to scale the cloud-clad hills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While thunders murmured in our very ear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To leap the lair of the live cataract,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pray its foaming pardon for the insult;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To dare the broken tree-bridge across the stream;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To crouch behind the broad white waterfall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tongue of the glen, like to a hidden thought⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dazzled, and deafened, yet the more delighted;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To reach the rock which makes the fall and pool;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There to fee safe, or not to care if not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fling the free loot over my native hills,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which seemed to breathe the bracing breeze we loved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The more it lifted up our loosened locks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That nought might be between us and the skies;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, hand in hand, leap, laughing, with closed eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Trent’s death-loving deeps; yet was she kind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever to us; and bare us buoyant up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And followed our young strokes, and cheered us on⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as an elder sister bending above</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A child, to teach it how to order its feet⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As quick we dashed, in reckless rivalry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To reach, perchance, some long green floating flag⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just when the sun’s hot lip first touched the stream,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reddening to be so kissed; and we rejoiced,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As breasting it on we went over depth and death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strong in the naked strife of elements,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Toying with danger in as little fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As with a maiden’s ringlets. And oft, at night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bewildered and bewitched by favorite stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We would breathe ourselves amid unfooted snows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For there is poetry where aught is pure;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or over the still dark heath, leap along, like harts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the broad moonlight; for we felt where’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We leapt the golden gorse, or lowly ling,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We could not be from home.⁠—That friend is gone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s the whole universe before our souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where shall we meet next? Shall we meet again?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! might it be in some far happy world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I might light upon his lonely soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hard by some broad blue stream, where high the hills,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wood-bearded, sweep to its brink⁠—musing, as wont,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With love-like sadness, upon sacred things;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For much in youth we loved and mused on them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To say what ought to be to human wills,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And measure mortals sternly; to explore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bearings of men’s duties and desires;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To note the nature and the laws of mind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To balance good with evil; and compare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nature and necessity of each;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To long to see the ends and end of things;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if no end there be, the endless, then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As suns look into space; these were our joys⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our hopes⁠—our meditations⁠—our attempts.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, if I have enjoyed more love than others,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is but superior suffering, and is more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than balanced by the loss of one we love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And love, itself, hath passed. One fond fair girl</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remains; one only, and she loves me still.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But it is not love I feel: it is pore kindness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall I find another like my last?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden and the gorgeous loveliness⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sunset beauty! Ah! I saw it set.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart, alas! set with it. I have drained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life of all love, as doth an iron rod</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heaven’s of lightning; I have done with it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all its waking woes, and dreamed-of joys.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more shall beauty star the air I live in;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no more will I wake at dead of night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hearken to the roaring of the wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though it came to carry one away⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Claiming for sin. Ah! I am lost forever.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To earn the world’s delights by equal sins.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seems the great aim of life⁠—the aim succeeds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here it is madness, and perdition there.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, but for thee, I had renounced these joys⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These cursed joys my soul now writhes among,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to a half-crushed reptile on a rose:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ay, but for thee, I might have now been happy!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why charge, why wrong me thus? When first I knew thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I deemed it thine ambition to be damned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine every thought, almost, had gone from good,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As far as finite is from infinite;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then thou wast as near to me as now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hadst declined in worship, and in wish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To please thy God; nor wouldst thou e’er repent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What more need I to justify attempt?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I shrunk back from granting aught I promised?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy love of knowledge⁠—is that satisfied?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is. Yet knowledge is a doubtful boon⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Root of all good and fruit of all that’s bad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have caused face to face with elements,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, learned the luminous language of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the angelic kindred of high Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright articulations of all spheres⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impetuous hearted orbs, and mountain-maned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye circling onwards breathless through the air⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wisest stars which speak themselves in signs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too sacred to be explicable here;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now what better am I?⁠—nearer God?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the void finds a voice mine answer know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What better or what worse thou canst not tell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, good and evil! Wherein differ they?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do they not both accrue from the same cause⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ripeness and decay? Light, light alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hues, how contrary soever, is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The common cause.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Distracter of God’s truth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall not His word suffice the living world?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou canst not have lacked joys?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We seek them oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Among our own delusions, pains and follies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hath not care perished from thy heart, as did</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The viper flung from the apostle’s hand?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay; and, like that, all care will cease in fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dark wretched thoughts like ice-isles in a stream,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Choke up my mind and clash;⁠—and to no end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In spite of all we suffer and enjoy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There comes this question, over and over again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Driven into the brain as a pile is driven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What shall become of us hereafter? what</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it we shall do? how feel, how be?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there are times when burning memory flows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In on the mind, that saving it would slay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As did the lava-floods which choked of yore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Cyclopean cities⁠—brimming up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brasslike their mighty moulds. And shall the past</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus ruinously perfect aye remain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or present, past, and coming, all be one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In natural mystery? Like snow, which lies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down-wreathed round the lips of some black pit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thoughts which obscure the truth accumulate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And those which solve it in it lose themselves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there is no true knowledge till descent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor then till after. What shall make the truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Visible? Through the smoky glass of sense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blessed sun would never know himself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All truth is one. All error is alike.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadow of a mountain hath no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Substance than hath a dead and moss-mailed pine’s;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But only more gigantic impotence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast thou not had thine every quest?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Save one.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I proffer now the power which thou dost long for.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say but the word, and thou shalt press a throne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But less than mine⁠—the scarcely less than God’s;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A throne, at which earth’s puny potentates</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May sue for slavedoms⁠—and be satisfied.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have had enough of the infinities:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am moderate now. I will have the throne of earth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou shalt. Yet, mind!⁠—with that, the world must end.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I can survive.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, die with it must thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why should I die? I am egg-full of life:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And life’s as serious a thing as death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is in its first young quarter yet;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I dare not, cannot credit it shall die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will not have it, then.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It matters not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know thou wilt never have ease at heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until thou hast thy soul’s whole, fall desire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whenever that may happen, all is done.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, then⁠—be it now! I live but for myself⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The whole world but for me. Friends, loves, and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sought, abandon me. It is time to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am yet young; yet have I been deserted,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wronged, by those whom most I have loved and served.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sun, moon, and stars! may they all fall on me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When next I trust another⁠—man or woman.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth rivals Hell too often, at the best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All hearts are stronger for the being hollow.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that was why mine was no match for theirs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pith is out of it now.⁠—Lord of the world!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It will not directly perish?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not, perhaps.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wilt have all fame, while thou livest, now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I care not: fame is folly: for, it is, sure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far more to be well known of God than man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all my sins I feel that I am God’s.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Farewell, then, for a time!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am alone.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone? He clings around me like the clouds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon a hill. When will the clouds roll off?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When will sun visit me? O! Thou great God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In whose right hand the elements are atoms⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In whose eye, light and darkness but a wink⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who, in Thine anger, like a blast of cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dost make the mountains shake like chattering teeth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have mercy! Pity me! For it is Thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who hast fixed me to this test. Wilt Thou not save?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive me, Father! but I long to die:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I long to live to Thee, a pure, free mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take again, God! and thou, fair Earth, the form</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And spirit which, at first, ye lent me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such as they were, I have used them. Let them part.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I weary of this world; and, like the dove,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Urged o’er life’s barren flood, sweep, tired, back</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee who sent’st me forth. Bear with me, God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not worthy of thy wrath, nor love!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! that the things which have been were not now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In memory’s resurrection! But the past</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bears in her arms the present and the future;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what can perish while perdition is?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the hot, angry, crowding courts of doubt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within the breast, it is sweet to escape, and soothe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul in looking upon natural beauty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! earth, like man her son, is half divine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is not a leaf within this quiet spot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But which I seem to know; should miss, if gone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I could run over its features, hour by hour.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The quaintly figured beds⁠—the various flowers⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mazy paths all cunningly converged⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The black yew hedge, like a beleaguering host,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Round some fair garden province⁠—here and there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cloud-like laurel clumps sleep, soft and fast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pillowed by their own shadows⁠—and beyond,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ripe and ruddy fruitage⁠—the sharp firs’</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fringe, like an eyelash, on the faint-blue west⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The white owl, wheeling from the grey old church⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its age-peeled pinnacles; and tufted top⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The oaks, which spread their broad arms in the blast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bid storms come, and welcome; there they stand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom a summer passes like a smile:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the proud peacock towers himself there and screams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ruffling the imperial purples of his neck.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er all, the giant poplars, which maintain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Equality with clouds half way up Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which whisper with the winds none else can see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And how to angels as they wing by them;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lonely, bowery, woodland view before⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, making all more beautiful, thou, sweet moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leading slow pomp, as triumphing o’er Heaven!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High riding in thy loveless, deathless brightness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in thy cold, unconquerable beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though there were nothing worthy in the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even to lie below thee, face to God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Night, in her own name, and God’s again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath dipped the earth in dew;⁠—and there she lies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even like a heart all trembling with delight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till passion murder power to speak⁠—so mute.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Young maiden moon! just looming into light⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would that aspect never might be changed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor that fine form, so spirit-like, be spoiled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With fuller light. Oh! keep that brilliant shape;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Keep the delicious honor of thy youth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweet sister of the sun, more beauteous thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than he sublime. Shine on, nor dread decay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may take meaner things; but thy bright look,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smiling away an immortality,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assures it us⁠—nay, it seems, half, to give.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth may decease. God will not part with thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fair ark of light, and every blessedness!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yes, earth, this earth, may foul the face of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like some swart mole on beauty’s breast⁠—or dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stiff, mangled reptile, some clear well⁠—while thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shalt shine, aye brilliant, on creation’s corse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to a diamond on a dead man’s hand;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whence God shall pluck thee to His breast, or bid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beam ’mid His lightning locks. What are earth’s joys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To watching thee, tending thy bright flock over</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fields of Heaven? Thy light misleadeth not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though eyes which image Heaven oft lure to Hell;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy smile betrayeth not⁠—though sweet as that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which wins and damns. Mother, and maid of light!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That, like a God, redeems the world to Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making us one with thee, and with the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with the stars in glory⁠—lovely moon!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am immortal as thyself; and we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall look upon each other yet, in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Often⁠—but never, never more on earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I to die so soon? This death⁠—the thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes oh my heart as through a burning glass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot bend mine eyes to earth, but thence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It riseth, spectre-like, to mock⁠—nor towards</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The west, where sunset is, whose long bright pomp</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Makes men in love with change⁠—but there it lowers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eve’s last, still lingering, darkening, cloud; and on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The escutcheon of the morn, it is there⁠—it is there!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fears will come upon the bravest mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the white moon upon the crimson west.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have attractions for all miseries:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every course of thought, within my heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaves a new layer of woe. But it must end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It will all be one, hereafter. Let it be!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My bosom, like the grave, holds all quenched passions.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not that I have not found what I sought⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, that the world⁠—tush! I shall see it die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hate, and shall outlive the hypocrite.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stealthily, slowly, like the polar sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who peeps by fits above the air-walled world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heavenly fief, he knows and feels his own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart o’erlooks the Paradise of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which it hath lost, in cold, reluctant joy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I live and see all beauteous things about me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But feel no nature prompting from within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To meet and profit by them. I am like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That fabled forest of the Apennine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which leafless lives; whereto the spring’s bright showers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Summer’s heat breathless, autumn’s fruitful juice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing avail;⁠—nor winter’s killing cold.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet have I done, said, thought, in time now past,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What, rather than remember, I would die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or do again. It is the thinking on’t,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the repentance, maddens. I have thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon such things so long and grievously,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My lip have grown like to a cliff-chafed sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pale with a tidal passion; and my soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once high and bright and self-sustained as Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unsettled now for life or death, feels like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The grey gull balanced on her bowlike wings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Between two black waves seeking where to dive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long we live, thinking nothing of our fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For in the morn of life we mark it not⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It falls behind; but as our day goes down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We catch it lengthening with a giant’s stride,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ushering us unto the feet of night.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dark thoughts, like spots upon the sun, revolve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In troops fox days together round my soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Disfiguring and dimming. Death! oh death!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The past, the present, and the future, like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dog three-headed, by the gates of woe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting, seem ready to devour me each.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I dare not look on them. I dare not think.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very best deeds I have ever done</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seem worthy reprobation, have to be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Repented of. But have I done aught good?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh that my soul were calmer! Grant me, God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy peace; that added, I can smile and die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy Spirit only is reality:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things beside are folly, falsehood, shame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
