<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A mountain⁠—Sunrise.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hail beauteous Earth! Gazing o’er thee, I all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forget the bounds of beings; and I long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fill thee, as a lover pines to blend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soul, passion, yea existence, with the fair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creature he calls his own. I ask for nought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before or after death but this⁠—to lie,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And look, and live, and bask, and bless myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon thy broad bright bosom. From thee I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sprang, and to thee I turn, heart, arm and brain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yes, I am all thine own. Thou art the sole</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Parent. To rock and river, plain and wood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cry, ye are my kin. While I, O Earth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am but an atom of thee, and a breath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passing unseen and unrecorded like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tiny throb here in my temple’s pulse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art for ever and the sacred bride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of heaven⁠—worthy the passion of our God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O! full of lights love, grace!⁠—the grace of all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who owe to thee their life; thy Maker’s love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His face’s light. All thine rejoice in thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou in thyself for aye; rolling through air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As seraphs’ song out of their trumpet lips</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rolls round the skies of Heaven. See the sun!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s crest upon His azure shield the Heavens.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Canst thou, a spirit, look upon him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I led him from the void, where he was wrought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By this right hand, up to the glorious seat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His brightness overshadows; built his throne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On piles of gold; and laid his chambers on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beams of gold: wrapped a veil of fire around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His face; and bade him reign and burn like me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There, ever since, sat warming into life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These worlds as in a nest, he has and is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fall he must. I have done, do, nought else</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From my first thought to this and to my last.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No matter; it is beneath this mind of mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To reck of aught. I bear, have borne the ill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of ages, of eternities⁠—and must.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I care not. I shall sway the world as now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which worse and worse sinks with me as I sink,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till finite souls evanish as a vapour;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till immortality, the proud thing, perish;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God alone be and eternity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then will I clap my hands and cry to Him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have done! Have Thy will now! There is none but Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am the first created being. I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will be the last to perish and to die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art a fit monitor, methinks, of pleasure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To the high air sunshine and cloud are one;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pleasure and pain to me. Thou and the earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone feel these as different⁠—for Ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are under them⁠—the Heavens and I above.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But tell me, have ye scenes like this in Hell?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, not in Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is Heaven? not the toys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of singing, love and music? such a place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were fit for women only.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Heaven is no place;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless it be a place with God, allwhere.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the being good⁠—the knowing God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The consciousness of happiness and power;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With knowledge which no spirit e’er can lose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But doth increase in every state; and aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It most delights in the full leave to do.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But why consume me with such questions? Why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Add earth to Hell, in the great chain of worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which God in wrath hath bound about me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas therefore that I closed with thee, great Fiend!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou mightst answer all things I proposed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or bring me those who would do.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All these things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wilt know sometime, when to see and know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are one; to see a thing and comprehend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nature of it essentially; perceive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The reason and the science of its being,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the relations with the universe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all things actual or possible,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mortal, immortal, spiritual, gross.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This, when the spirit is made free of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is the divine result; proportioned still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the intelligence as human; for</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are degrees in Heaven as everything,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By God’s will. Unimaginable space</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As full of suns as is earth’s sun of atoms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Faileth to match His boundless variousness;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ever must do, though a thousand worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As diverse from each other as is thine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From any of thy system’s, were elanced</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each minute into life unendingly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All of yon worlds, and all who dwell in them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stand in diverse degrees of bliss and being.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the ten thousand times ten thousandth grade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of blessedness, above this world’s and man’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ability to feel or to conceive,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul may pass and yet know nought of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More than a dim and miniature reflection</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of its most bright infinity;⁠—for God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Makes to each spirit its peculiar Heaven;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet is Heaven a bright reality,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As this or any of yon worlds; a state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all is loveliness and power and love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all sublimest qualities of mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not infinite, are limited alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By the surrounding Godhood, and where nought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But what produceth glory and delight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To creature and Creator is; where all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enjoy entire dominion o’er themselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Acts, feelings, thoughts, conditions, qualities,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit and soul and mind; all under God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For spirit is soul Deified;⁠—while earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the immortal vast, God-natured Spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is but a spell, which having served to light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A lamp, is cast into consuming fire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And Hell? Is it nought but pits and chains and flames?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>An ever greatening sense of ill and woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye crushing down the soul, but filling never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its infinite capacity of pain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But human nature is not infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And therefore cannot suffer endlessly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God may create in time what shall endure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto Eternity. With Him is no</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Distinction, nor in that which is of Him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then is not soul of God, but man and earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soul when made spirit is of earth no more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor time, but of Eternity and Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis but when in the body, and bent down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To worldly ends, that human souls become</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Objects of time, as most are, till the hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes when the soul of man shall be made one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With God’s spirit; and where shall woe be then?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where, sin? where, suffering? when the mortal soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be Divinised and eternised by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s very spirit put upon it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can souls begotten to predestined doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From and before all worlds, be deemed of earth;</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Things spiritual, as belonging God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are known unto Him, and predestined from</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternity, nor these alone; but Flesh</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forms not nor does it need the care of Fate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The object of eternal knowledge must</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have like existence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then it cannot be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound unto torment; that would be to bring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Torture on godlike essence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast not heard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How thine existence here, on earth, is but</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dark and narrow section of a life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was with God, long ere the sun was lit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shall be yet, when all the bold bright stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are dark as death-dust⁠—Immortality</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Wisdom tending thee on either hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy divine sisters? But do thou believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en what thou wilt. It matters not to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is it the nature or the deed of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To render finite follies infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or to eternise sin and death in fire?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For so long as the punishment endures,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The crime lasts. Were it not for thy presence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit! I would not deem Hell were.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My presence pass for more than it is worth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I pray, nor yet my absence. Trust me, I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could wish, with thee, that Hell were blotted out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of utmost space. ’Tis man himself aye makes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His own God and his hell. But this is truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The truth is perilous never to the true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor knowledge to the wise; and to the fool,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to the false, error and truth alike.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Error is worse than ignorance. But say:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How can eternal punishment be due</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To temporal offences, to a pulse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of momentary madness?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pardon me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sin is not temporary. Nothing is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of spiritual nature, but hath cause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal and immortal end in all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As spirits. Therefore till the soul shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By grace redeified, as is the soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So is the sin, for ever before God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sin is not of the spirit, but of that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which blindeth spirit, heart and brain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Believe so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The law of all the worlds is retribution.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But is it so of God?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The laws of Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not of earth; there law is liberty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou thundercloud of spirits, darkning</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The skies and wrecking earth! Could I hate men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How I should joy with thee, even as an eagle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nigh famished, in the fellowship of storms;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I still love them. What will come of men?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whatever may, perdition is their meed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were Heaven dispeopled for a ministry</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To warn them of their ways; were thou and I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To monish them; were Heaven, and Earth, and Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To preach at once, they still would mock and jeer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As now; but never repent until too late;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until the everlasting hour had struck.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men might be better if we better deemed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of them. The worst way to improve the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is to condemn it. Men may overget</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Delusion⁠—not despair.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why love mankind?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The affections are thy systems weaknesses;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wasteful outlets of self-maintenance.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The wild flower’s tendril, proof of feebleness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Proves strength; and so we fling our feelings out,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tendrils of the heart, to bear us up.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Earth! how drear to think to tear oneself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even for an hour, from looks like this of thine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From features, oh! so fair; to quit for aye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The luxury of thy side. Why, why art thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus glorious, and ’twere not to sate the soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And chide us for the senseless dream of Heaven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The still strong stream sweeps onward to its end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like one of the great purposes of God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like, may be, a soul like mine to Him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Along yon deep blue vein upon thy bosom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth? I could float for ever. See it there⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Winding among its green and smiling isles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Charity amidst her children dear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Peace, rejoicing in her olive wreaths,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gladdening as she glides along the lands.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet all this must end⁠—must pass; drop down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oblivion like a pebble in a pit:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For God shall lay His hand upon the earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And crush it up like a red leaf.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not be?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot root the thought, nor hold it firm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This same sweet world which thou wouldst fondly deem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternal, may be; which I soon shall see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destruction suck back as the tide a shell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It will not be yet. I’ll woo thee, world, again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And revel in thy loveliness and love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have a heart with room for every joy:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And since we must part sometime, while I may,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll quaff the nectar in thy flowers, and press</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The richest clusters of thy luscious fruit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the cup of my desires. I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My years are numbered not in units yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I cannot live unless I love and am loved;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless I have the young and beautiful</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound up like pictures in my book of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the intensest vanity alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which makes us bear with life. Some seem to live,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose hearts are like those unenlightened stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the first darkness⁠—lifeless, timeless, useless⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With nothing but a cold night air about them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not suns⁠—not planets⁠—darkness organized:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orbs of a desert darkness: with no soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To light its watchfire in the wilderness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And civilize the solitude one moment.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are such seemingly; but how or why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They live I know not. This to me is life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That if life be a burden, I will join</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make it but the burden of a song:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hate the world’s coarse thought. And this is life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To watch young beauty’s budlike feelings burst</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And load the soul with love;⁠—as that pale flower,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which opes at eve, spreads sudden on the dark</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its yellow bloom, and sinks the air down with sweets.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let Heaven take all that’s good⁠—Hell all that’s foul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave us the lovely! and we will ask no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To me it seems time all should end. The sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grows gray. It is not so bright nor blue as once.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well I remember, as it were yesterday,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When earth and Heaven went happy, hand in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the morning dew of youth about them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the bright unworldly hearts of youth and truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the maiden bosoms of the beautiful:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere earth sinned, or the pure indignant Heavens</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Retreated high, nigh God; when earth was all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A creeping mass alive with shapeless things:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when there were but three things in the world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Monsters, mountains and water: before age</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had thickened the eyes of stars; and while the sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoicing like a ring of saints round God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Heaven on Heaven about some newborn sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In its sublime samesoundingness, laughed out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cried not I! Like God I never rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God hath his rest; earth hers. Let me have mine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet must I look on thee, fair scene, again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere I depart. The glory of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is on all hands. In one encircling ken,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I gaze on river, sea, isle, continent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mountain, and wood, and wild, and fire-lipped hill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lake, and golden plain, and sun, and Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where the stars brightly die, whose death is day;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>City and port and palace, ships and tents,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lie massed and mapped before me. All is here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The elements of the world are at my feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above me and about me. Now would I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be and do somewhat beside that I am.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Canst thou not give me some ethereal slave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the pure essence of an element⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such as my bondless brain hath oft times drawn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the divine insanity of dreams⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To stand before me and obey me, spirit?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Call out, and see if aught arise to thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Green dewy Earth, who standest at my feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Singing and pouring sunshine on thy head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As näiad native water, speak to me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am thy son. Canst thou not now, as once,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring forth some being dearer, liker to thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than is my race⁠—Titan or tiny fay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stream-nymph or wood-nymph? She hath ceased to speak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like God, except in thunder, or to look</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless in lightning. Miracles, with earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are out of fashion as with Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>More’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pity. Call elsewhere! Old Earth is hard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hearing, maybe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I beseech thee, Sea!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tossing thy wavy locks in sparkling play,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to a child awakening with the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To laughter. Canst not thou disgulph for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From thy deep bosom, deep as Heaven is high,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all thy sea-gods one, or sea-maids?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I half despair. Fire! that art slumbering there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like some stern warrior in his rocky fort,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>After the vast invasion of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast not some flaming imp, or messenger</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of empyrean element, to whom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In virtue of his nature, are both known</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The secrets of the burning, central, void below,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yon bright Heaven, out of whose aëry fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are wrought the forms of angels and the thrones?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast none at hand to do my bidding? Come!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Breathe out a spirit for me! One I ask</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shall be with me always, as a friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not like thee, who despotisest o’er</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart thou seek’st to serve. I must be free.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All finite souls must serve; their widest sway</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is but the rule of service. This fair earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which thou dost boast so much of, why, thou see’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis but the particoloured, scummy dross</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the original element wherefrom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fiery worlds were framed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Air! and thou, Wind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which art the unseen similitude of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Spirit, His most meet and mightiest sign;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The earth with all her steadfastness and strength,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sustaining all, and bound about with chains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mountains, as is life with mercies, ranging round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all her sister orbs the whole of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is not so like the unlikenable One</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As thou. Ocean is less divine than thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For although all but limitless, it is yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Visible, many a land not visiting.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But thou art, Lovelike, everywhere; o’er earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er ocean triumphing, and aye with clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That like the ghost of ocean’s billows roll,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Decking or darkening Heaven. The sun’s light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Floweth and ebbeth daily like the tides;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The moon’s doth grow or lessen, night by night;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stirless stars shine forth by fits and hide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And our companion planets come and go;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all are known, their laws and liberties.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But no man can foreset thy coming, none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reason against thy going; thou art free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The type impalpable of Spirit, thou.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thunder is but a momentary thing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a world’s deathrattle, and is like death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lightning, like the blaze of sin, can blind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only and slay. But what are these to thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In thine all-present variousness? Now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So light as not to wake the snowiest down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the dove’s breast, winning her bright way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Calm and sublime as Grace unto the soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Towards her far native grove; now, stern and strong</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ordnance, overturning tree and tower;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cooling the white brows of the peaks of fire⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turning the sea’s broad furrows like a plough⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fanning the fruitening plains, breathing the sweets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of meadows, wandering o’er blinding snows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sands like sea-beds and the streets of cities,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where men as garnered grain lie heaped together;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freshening the cheeks, and mingling oft the locks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of youth and beauty ’neath star-speaking eve;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swelling the pride of canvas, or, in wrath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scattering the fleets of nations like dead leaves:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all, the same o’ermastering sightless force,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bowing the highest things of earth to earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lifting up the dust unto the stars;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fatelike, confounding reason, and like God’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit, conferring life upon the world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Midst all corruption incorruptible;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Monarch of all the elements! hast thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No soft Eolian sylph, with sightless wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To spare a mortal for an hour?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Peace, peace!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All nature knows that I am with thee here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that thou need’st no minor minister.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee I personate the world⁠—its powers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beliefs, and doubts and practices.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Are all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine invocations fruitless, then?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They are.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us enjoy the world!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If ’twas God’s will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou shouldst visit me He shall not send</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Temptation to my heart in vain. Sweet world!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We all still cling to thee. Though thou thyself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passest away, yet men will hanker about thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like mad ones by their moping haunts. Men pass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cleaving to things themselves which pass away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like leaves on waves. Thus all things pass for ever,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save mind and the mind’s meed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let us too pass!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
