<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-24" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Colonnade and lawn.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is it thou wilt tell me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What ne’er again may be, nor e’er till now hath been.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where didst thou see⁠—and what?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In space. He took me there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of whom I oft have told thee. Midst in air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was God. I’ll tell thee that he told the spheres;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the great family of the universe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound Him were gathered as a fire: but we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Held back; and, saving God, none did us see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though round his throne in sunny halo rolls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A ceaseless, countless throng of sainted souls.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say on, love! Let me hear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A sound, then, first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I heard as of a pent-up flood just burst:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It was the rush of God’s world-winnowing wing;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which bowed the orbs as flowers are bowed by breath of spring.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then a voice I heard, a voice sublime⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To which the hoarded thunders of all time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pealing earth’s death-knell shall a whisper be⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Saying these words⁠—Where will ye worship me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ay, where shall be your Maker’s holy place?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heaven of Heavens is poor before His face.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall ye mete my temple, ye who die?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look! can ye span your God’s infinity?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear, mighty universe, thy Maker’s voice!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let all thy myriad, myriad worlds rejoice!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! I, your Maker, do amid ye come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To choose my worship and to name my home.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This heard each sphere; and all throughout the sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came crowding round. Our earth was rolling by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When God said to it⁠—Rest! and fast it stood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With voice like winds through some wide olden wood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus spake the One again: Behold, O Earth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy parent, God! it is I who gave thee birth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all my love I did thee once endow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all my mercy⁠—and thou hast them now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But hear my words! thou never lovedst me well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor fearedst my wrath: dreadst thou no longer Hell?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dream’st thou that guilt shall always mock those fires?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That deathless death which Hell for aye expires?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should all creation its rebellion raise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I speak, and this broad universe doth blaze⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pass like a dew-drop ’neath mine angry rays⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blaze like the fat in sacrificial flame:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that burned offering, when I come to claim,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its scorching, quenchless mass, all, I will pour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon thy naked soul:⁠—canst thou endure?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He spake; and, as the fear-fraught words flew past,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth fluttered like a dead leaf in their blast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am not I God? Answer me! Hope not thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impenitent, to ward my righteous blow.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet, come again! my proffered mercy hear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoice and sing! sweet music in thine ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And peace I speak: seek but to be forgiven:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Repent! and thou shalt meet thy God in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go! cleanse thy brow from blood, thy heart from crime,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And on thy Saviour call while yet is time!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now to this universe of pride and sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I speak, ere yet I call mine angels in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Draw nigh, ye worlds!⁠—and, lo! their light did seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before His eye paled to a pearl’s dull beam.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Attend! said God⁠—o’er all He lift his hand.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where will ye set my tent? where shall my temple stand?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all were dumb. Distracting silence spread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throughout that host as each were stricken dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I made ye. I endowed ye. Ye are mine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then trembled out each orb: Thine, God! for ever Thine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that ye have, within myself have I;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, am complete; full inexhaustibly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I dwell within myself, and ye in me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not in yourselves; I have infinity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The everything in all things is my throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your might is my might, and your wealth mine own:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis by my power and sufferance that ye shine:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I live in light and all your light is mine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be dark! said God. Night was. Each glowing sphere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dulled, Night seemed everything and everywhere,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that in utter space a feeble flare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Told that the pits of hell were sunken there.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shuddered in fear the universe the while,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till God again embraced it with a smile.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all things made were glad. Come now and hear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye worlds! said God, the truth I thus make clear:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My words are mercy, wherefore should ye fear?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight, obedient to his sacred will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One great concentrate globe they crowd to fill;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Systems and suns pour forth their glowing urns;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full in the face of God the glory burns.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hearken, thou host! thy trembling hope to raise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I to all Being thus make plain my ways;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, the creator, bade creation rise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And matter came in void like clouds in skies;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lifeless and cold it spread throughout all space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And darkness dwelt and frowned upon its face:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Chaos I bade depart this work of mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight the mighty elements disjoin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then light I lit; then order I ordained,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And put the dance of atoms to an end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Matter I brake, and scattered into globes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And clad ye each in green and growing robes:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your sizes, places, forms, I fixed with laws,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wrought the link between effect and cause.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then formed I lives for each, which might inherit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will, reason, form, and power⁠—not deathless spirit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then I made spirits, things of Heavenly worth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deathless, Divine. Round these, from every earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I gathered forms and features fit for love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trust, pleasure, power, and all I could approve.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To every spirit I disclosed my name,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My love, my might, and whence all Being came:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To deathless souls I righteously decreed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accountability for thought, word, deed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then every orb complete, along the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In glory, beauty, order, harmony,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I launched. Souls, worlds did every thing possess</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which could a mortal and immortal bless.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all the hope of happier state was given⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all I keep one common boundless Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye all have freedom, and ye all do sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ye are creatures: but ye all may win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life everlasting⁠—everlasting joy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If ye do but the love of sin destroy:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This only is offence; for sin ye must</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not by my will; but weakness dwells with dust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless ye have sinned ye cannot enter Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall a sinless creature be forgiven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by forgiveness only can ye claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hope in my mercy, trust upon my name.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I knew that ye would all to sin be given;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I, even God, have paid your price to Heaven:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if ye will not journey on that way⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The truth⁠—the life⁠—what do ye merit? say!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death is the gate of life, and sin, of bliss:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mark the dread truth! but mourn your deeds amiss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cast off your guilt! abandon folly’s path!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turn to the Lord your God ere hell His wrath!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turn from your madness, wicked ones, and live!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take, take the bliss which God alone can give.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, the Creator, me all beings own⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, the Redeemer, I will still be known⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, too, the Judge⁠—the each⁠—the three⁠—the one.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again the Everlasting cried⁠—Repent!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bless or curse I am Omnipotent.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And what art thou, created Being? Round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That world of worlds His arm the Almighty wound;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bright immensity He raised, and pressed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All trembling, like a babe, unto His breast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There, in the Father’s bosom rose again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of filial love, the universal strain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strong and exultant⁠—blissful, pure, sublime,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It rolled, and thrilled, and swelled in notes unknown to time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think ye that I, who thus do ye maintain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus always cherish ye, or all were vain⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye all would drop into your native void,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If by my hand ye were not held and buoyed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think ye that I cannot uphold in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In righteous state, the souls I have forgiven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is this a weightier task? with God, ’tis one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To guide a sunbeam or create a sun⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rule ten thousand thousand worlds or none.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, worlds! said God, but learn, ere ye depart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My favoured temple is an humble heart;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therein to dwell I leave my loftiest skies⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There shall my holy of all holies rise!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He spake; and swiftly, reverent to His will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sprang each bright orb on high its sphere to fill.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glory to God! they chanted as they soared⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Father Almighty! be Thou all-adored.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art the glory⁠—we, Thine universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Serve but abroad Thy lustre to disperse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unsearchable, and yet to all made known!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world at once Thy kingdom and Thy throne⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pity us, God! nor chase us quite away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before Thy wrath, as night before the day.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Thee, our God, we live; from Thee we came⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The feeble sparks of Thine eternal flame.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy breath from nothing filled us all at first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And could again as soon the bubble burst.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Thee, like motes in the sunbeam, we move;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glow in Thy light, and gladden in Thy love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And midst this praise, earth was the only one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sullen remained in that grand union</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of joy and harmony. Word spake she none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Earth only had been chidden.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not alone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High o’er all height, God gat upon His throne.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Downwards He bent; and, as a grain of sand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He lifted up our globe. Then from His hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ’twere in pity, bowled the ingrate sphere,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which rushed like ruin down its dark career.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And high the air’s blue billows rolled and swelled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On many an island world mine eye beheld.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And where and what is he, this mighty friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who to thee, human, thus his might doth lend?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who bore thee harmless, as thou sayst, through space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And brought thee front before thy Maker’s face?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not where he is. It is but at times</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he is with me; but he aye sublimes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His visits thus, by lending me his might</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er things more bright than day, more deep than night.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he obeys me⁠—whether good or ill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His or my object, he obeys me still.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Festus! I conjure thee to beware</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lest thus the Evil one thy soul ensnare.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What! may not a free spirit have preferred</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mortal to his heart⁠—as thou thy bird</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lovest, because it singeth of the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Although it is as far below thy soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I ’neath an archangel’s majesty?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God will protect the atom as the whole.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Him, then, I pray: the spirit full must share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The truths it feels with God Himself in prayer.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So guide us, God! in all our works and ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That heart may feel, hand act, mouth show Thy praise;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thai when they meet, who love, and when they part,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each may be high in hope, and pure in heart:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they who have seen, and they who have but heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Thy great deeds, may both obey Thy word!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Unto the wise belongs the sphere of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to the spirit world-compelling might.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon sun, now setting in the golden main,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall count me his ere next he rise again.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would that the earth had nothing fair to lure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor being more to answer or endure!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I foresee, fore-suffer. Bound to earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wrecked in the deeps of Heaven, in Death’s expiring birth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
