<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—The centre.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold us in the fire-crypts of the world!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through seas and buried mountains tomblike tracts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fit to receive the skeleton of Death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he is dead⁠—through earthquakes, and the bones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of earthquake-swallowed cities, have we wormed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down to the ever burning forge of fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon in awful and omnipotent ease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nature, the delegate of God, brings forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her everlasting elements, and breathes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Around that fluent heat of life which clothes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Itself in lightnings, wandering through the air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pierces to the last and loftiest pore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Earth’s snow-mantled mountains. In these vaults</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are hid the archives of the universe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And here, the ashes of all ages gone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each finally inurned. These pillars stand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth’s testimony to eternity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All that is solid now was fluid once;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Water, or air, or fire, or some one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Permanent, permeating, element;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As in this focal, world-evolving fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like what I see around⁠—the vacuous power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon the world is based, e’en as wherein</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It rolls, I must believe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The original</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all things is one thing. Creation is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One whole. The differences a mortal sees</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are diverse only to the finite mind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This marble-walled immensity o’erroofed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With pendant mountains glittering, awes my soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s hand hath scooped the hollow of this world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, none but His could; and I stand in it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a forgotten atom of the light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some star hath lost upon its lightning flight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here mayst thou lay thy hand on nature’s heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feel its thousand yeared throbbings cease.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High overhead, and deep beneath our feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sea’s broad thunder booms, scarce heard; around,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The arches, like uplifted continents</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of starry matter, burning inwardly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stand; and, hard by, earth’s gleaming axle sleeps,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All moving, all unmoved.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Age here on age</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lie heaped like withered leaves. And must it end?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God worketh slowly: and a thousand years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He takes to lift His hand off. Layer on layer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He made earth, fashioned it and hardened it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the great, bright, useful thing it is;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its seas, life-crowded, and soul-hallowed lands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He girded with the girdle of the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That sets its bosom glowing like Love’s own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Breathless embrace, close-clinging as for life;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Veined it with gold, and dusted it with gems,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lined it with fire, and round its heart-fire bowed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rock-ribs unbreakable: until at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth took her shining station as a star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heaven’s dark hall, high up the crowd of worlds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All this and thus did God; and yet it ends.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ball He rolled and rounded, melts away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en now to its constituent atomies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is enough. Though here were posited</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All secrets of existence, natural</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or supernatural, dwell not here would I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though ’twere to drain profoundest fountains. No!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love it not, the science nor the scene.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I long to know again the fresh green earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The breathing breeze, the sea and sacred stars.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These recollections crowd upon my soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As constellations on the evening skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And will not be forgotten. Let us leave!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aught that reminds the exile of his home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is surely pleasant. I, friend, am content.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot be content with less than Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Heaven, I love thee ever! sole and whole,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Living and comprehensive of all life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee, agy world, thee, universal Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And heavenly universe! thee, sacred seat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of intellective Time, the throned stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And old oracular night;⁠—by night or day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me thou canst not but be beautiful,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Boundless, all-central, universal sphere!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether the sun all-light thee, or the moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Embayed in clouds, mid starry island round,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With mighty beauty inundate the air;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or when one star, like a great drop of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From her full flowing urn hangs tremulous⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, like a tear from her the eye of night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let fall o’er nature’s volume as she reads:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, when in radiant thousands, each star reigns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In imparticipable royalty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaderless, uncontrasted with the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherein their light is lost, the sons of fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arch element of the Heavens;⁠—when storm and cloud</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Debar the mortal vision of the eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From wandering o’er thy threshold⁠—more and more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love thee, thinking on the splendid calm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which bounds the deadly fever of these days⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The higher, holier, spiritual Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when this world, within whose heartstrings now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I feel myself encoiled, shall be resolved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee I shall be permitted still perchance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love and live in endlessly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou seet hath holden fellowship with gods;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With eldest Time and primal matter, space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stars, and air, and all-inherent fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The watery deep and chaos, night, the all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the interior immortality,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And first-begotten Love. These rocks retain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their caverned footsteps printed in pure fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those were the times, the ancient youth of earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The elemental years, when earth and Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made one in holy bridals⁠—royal gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their bright immortal issue: when men’s minds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were vast as continents, and not as now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Minute and indistinguishable plots,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With here and there acres of untilled brains; when lived</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The great original, broad-eyed, sunken race,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose wisdom, like these sea-sustaining rocks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath formed the base of the world’s fluctuous lore:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When too, by mountainous travail, human might</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sought to possess the everlasting Heavens,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And incommunicable, by the right</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of self-acquirement and high kindred with</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Celestial virtues;⁠—when the mortal powers⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forecounsel, wisdom, and experience,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Teachers of all arts, founders of all good,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Godhood strove, and gloriously failed⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In failure half successful; as these scenes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fire-fountains, and volcano-utterances,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth-heavings, island vomitings, evince.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The world hath made such comet-like advance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lately on science, we may almost hope,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before we die of sheer decay, to learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Something about our infancy. But me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This troubles not. Were all earth’s mountain chains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To utter fire at once, what a grand show</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of pyrotechny for our neighbor moon!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us ascend; but not through the charred throat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of an extinct volcano.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This way⁠—down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So shalt thou thread the world at once.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Haste, haste.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
