<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-34" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Earth.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</b>⁠—An <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b> descending; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whence art thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I? from Heaven, and thither tend;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One moment here to bid ye to prepare.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our Lord the Eternal Son comes hither, girt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With His victorious hosts, to judge the world.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What victory hath our Almighty gained?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One final, over Death and Hell. Shout, earth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy freedom is accomplished, and thy foes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brought down to endless ruin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Angel, speak!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We burn to learn the tidings of this war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof thou tell’st, and doubtless wast a part.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hot from the fight I come. This lightning blade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath holpen well to thin the infernal rout,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which back hath fled to hell, howling like winds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But let me, at your will, ye peaceful saints,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Relate what happed to us from first to last.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The time was come in Heaven when God the Son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bowing his head before the Omnipotent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who doubled every blessing infinite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith he had enriched His Only One</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From first, rose from his glorious throne, and stepped</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into His sun-bright car, calling aloud</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His angels to attend Him while He went</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To judge the earth, as fore-ordained of old:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Heaven and earth might view the majesty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mercy of the God of all. We came,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Selectest spirits, countless⁠—crowded bright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the great stream of stars which flows through Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fast by the foot of God, each wave a world⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eager to the eye this act of glory long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Talked of in Heaven, and now to be achieved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forth from the starry towers, and world-wide walls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Heaven, we set in high and silent joy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And journeyed half our way through Heaven, when lo!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sight which checked the foremost flaming ranks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That halted frontwise, working doubt at first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But triumph after. Shielded and drawn up close,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behind a broken and decaying world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From which the light had vanished like the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of a death-shrunk eye, sat Lucifer⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Midst in the powers of darkness, and the hosts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hell, enthroned sublime; and all were still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ambushed silence round the Foe of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But oh! how changed from him we knew in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose brightness nothing made might match nor mar;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who rose, and it was morn;⁠—who stretched his wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stepped from star to star;⁠—so changed he showed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most like a shadowy meteor, thorough which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars dim glint⁠—woe-wasted, pined with pain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by his side there sat or shrank a shape</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We angels knew not, but the Son of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Knew him, and called him Death; whom, when he saw,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Arousing, after, out of sleep intense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That unrealmed tyrant drew his mortal dart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And drave it through himself⁠—a shade, shade-quelled.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then to that chief of mischief and his fiends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who, thick as burning stones that from the throat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of some volcano foul the benighted sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shot up triumphant into air as they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beheld our ranks move on, thus spake our Lord⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not wrathfully, but sternly pitying:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell’s wretched remnant! wherefore crouch ye here?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it to sue destruction, or to bar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My passage? If it be, in both ye err.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And will ye trust yourselves again to war</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With me Almighty? Have I not overcome</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye separately, both? Speak, brutal Death!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fit follower and fellow to all woes⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherefore this instantaneous haste from hell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And both from Hadeän bondage, thus again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So soon to compass mightiest wickedness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tempt extremest wrath? Speak, head of hell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Him thus Lucifer: Almighty Son!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy power I defy not; but in peace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I war with fate. My life is to destroy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Evil hath more activity, if good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More strength: and one must wear the other out.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The more august the sin, so much the more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is my necessity. Yon earth hath been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The battle-plain of Heaven and hell. From Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who knowest all things, it were vain to hide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My purpose, which for a thousand years, the years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of bondage, hath grown in me and lived on,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Toad-like within a rock⁠—vital where all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beside was death⁠—to seize the nascent souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of men a they rerose from death to life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sweep them off in midst of all these hosts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assembled for that cause here as Thou seest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hell;⁠—the universal race of man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if ordained that not on them, but Thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Thine, old hate shall satisfy itself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Approach no nearer; for we live by death;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or turn the tide of fate, Thou sole who canst!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ceasing thereat, his host upraised a shout</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which shook the stars, and made them ring again.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our Lord to him then spake thus, mild as Spring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Addressing earth when smiling she lets fall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All flowerets from her lips⁠—’Tis well there is a God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! to what base extremes infernal pride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can push a princely spirit once in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee we will not destroy now, for thine hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath yet to come⁠—when least thou thinkest it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s wrath thou hast endured in punishment.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not yet His power. Away! I warn ye hence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere wrath ride forth again. To Him the Fiend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Answered: God rules not us the unordered damned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor recks of hell. For ages past belief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless by those who like ourselves denied</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine own eternity⁠—by creature mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>However lofty, hardly compassed⁠—we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have borne our pain without remorse, or sign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of pity from our Maker. Shall we now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Believe, while thus confronting Him again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He means us better? Never worse than now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore I say to ye, on! mightiest fiends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On! Let us reap companions for our woes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or earn annihilation! At the word,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His fiery phalanx rushed to bar the way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Him whose ways are over all His works.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A million spears blazed forth their answer bright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As of as many tongues. Serene our ranks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stood as the stars o’er thunder. God the Son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sat in His orbèd car, and breathed on them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And they were rolled up like the desert sands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the burning wind⁠—throne wrecked on throne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All ruined and fordone. Pursue! He cried,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor let them near the earth I go to judge.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we pursued, as many as He chose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And chased from sphere to sphere that wretched wreck</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of falsest fiends:⁠—and I, it seems, am first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all my victor brethren to declare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The triumph past and coming, and to cheer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tour hearts with tidings of our Lord, to whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be glory for His universal deeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to him, only God!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold where comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another warrior-angel from on high;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like angels, always singly or in hosts.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is the most dread Azrael, unto whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sword of Death is given as a boon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What sayst thou, heavenly one?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Azrael</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To the extreme bound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Light’s domain we chased the flying foe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who on the confines of the lower air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once rallied at their leader’s stern command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom more they fear, or seem to fear, than God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They halted, formed, and faced us. I and mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As on we came in order, full career,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exalted by success, hoped ardently</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One more convincing contest; but in spite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of future woe or the tempestuous threats</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the great Fiend who marshalled them, each eyed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His neighbor pale; their trembling shook all air;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And each one lift his arm, but no one struck.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awhile in dead throe-like suspense they stood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like the irresolution of the sea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At turn of tide⁠—then wheeled and fled amain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in one mass immense broke down from Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cliff-like;⁠—there let them lie! such fate have fiends.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we returned, hoping to meet, as charge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all was given, the Lord our glory here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let all the dead rejoice! their Saviour comes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
