<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Alcove and garden.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What happy things are youth and love and sunshine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How sweet to feel the sun upon the heart!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To know it is lighting up the rosy blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with all joyous feelings, prism-hued,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making the dark breast shine like a spar grot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We walk among the sunbeams as with angels.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, there are feelings so serene and sweet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Coming and going with a musical lightness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they can make amends for their passingness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And balance God’s condition to decay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As yon light fleecy cloudlet floating along,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like golden down from some high angel’s wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Breaks but relieves and beautifies the blue.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wonder if ever I could love another.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How I should start to see upon the sward</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A shadow not thine own armlinked with mine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See, here is a garland I have bound for thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, crown thyself; it will suit thee better, love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Place wreaths of everlasting flowers on tombs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deck with fading beauties forms that fade.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Put it away⁠—I will no crown save this:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And could the line of dust which here I trace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon my brow but warrant dust beneath⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And nothing more⁠—or could this bubble frame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Informed with soul, lashed from the stream of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By its own impetus, but burst at once,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vanish part on high and part below,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would be happy, nor would envy death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could I, like Heaven’s bolt, earthing quench myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This moment would I burn me out a grave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might I but be as many years in dying</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I have lived⁠—that might be some relief.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What canst thou mean?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mean? Is there not a future?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The past, the present and the coming, curse each!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The future, curse it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shall we not ever live</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And love as now?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ay, live I fear we must.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And love: because we then are happiest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We shall lack nothing having love: and we,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We must be happy everywhere⁠—we two!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For spiritual life is great and clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And self-continuous as the changeless sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rolling the same in every age as now;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether o’er mountain tops, where only snow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dwells, and the sunbeam hurries coldly by;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or o’er the vales, as now, of some old world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Older than ancient man’s. As is the sea’s,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So is the life of spirit, and the kind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then with natures raised, refined and freed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From these poor forms, our days shall pass in peace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And love; no thought of human littleness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall cross our high calm souls, shining and pure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the gold gates of Heaven. Like some deep lake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon a mountain summit they shall rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High above cloud and storm of life like this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All peace and power, and passionless purity;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or if a thought of other troubled times</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ruffle it for a moment, it shall pass</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a chance raindrop on its heavenward face.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love to meditate on bliss to come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not that I am unhappy here; but that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hope of higher bliss may rectify</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lower feeling which we now enjoy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This life, this world is not enough for us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are nothing to the measure of our mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For place we must have space; for time we must have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternity; and for a spirit godhood.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mind means not happiness: power is not good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True bliss is to be found in holy life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In charity to man⁠—in love to God:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should such duties cease, such powers decay?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are they not worthy of a deathless state⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A boundless scope⁠—a high uplifted life?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man, like the air-born eagle who remains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On earth only to feed and sleep and die;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But whose delight is on his lonely wing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wide sweeping as a mind, to force the skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High as the lightfall ere, begirt with clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It dash this, nether world⁠—immortal man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rushes aloft, right upwards, into Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O faith of Christ, sole honour of the world!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What know men of religion, save its forms?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True faith nor biddeth nor abideth form.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bended knee, the eye uplift is all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which man need render; all which God can bear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What to the faith are forms? A passing speck,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A crow upon the sky. God’s worship is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That only He inspires; and His bright words,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Writ in the red-leaved volume of the heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Return to him in prayer, as dew to Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our proper good we rarely seek or make;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mindless of our immortal powers and their</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal end, as is the pearl of its worth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rose its scent, the wave its purity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, we will quit these saddening themes. Wilt sing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me? for I am gloomy; and I love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy singing, sacred as the sound of hymns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On some bright Sabbath morning, on the moor,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all is still save praise; and where hard by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ripe grain shakes its bright beard in the sun;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wild bee hums more solemnly; the deep sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fresh green grass, the sun, and sunny brook,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All look as if they knew the day, the hour;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And felt with man the need and joy of thanks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot sing the lightsome lays of love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many thou know’st who can; but none that can</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love thee as I do⁠—for I love thy soul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I would save it, Festus! Listen then:</span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Is Heaven a place where pearly streams</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Glide over silver sand?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like childhood’s rosy dazzling dreams</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of some far faery land?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is Heaven a clime where diamond dews</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Glitter on fadeless flowers?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mirth and music ring aloud</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">From amaranthine bowers?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Ah no; not such, not such is Heaven!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Surpassing far all these;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such cannot be the guerdon given</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Man’s wearied soul to please.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For saint and sinner here below</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Such vain to be have proved:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the pure spirit will despise</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Whate’er the sense hath loved.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>There we shall dwell with Sire and Son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And with the mother-maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the Holy Spirit, one:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In glory like arrayed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not to one created thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Shall our embrace be given;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all our joy shall be in God;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">For only God is Heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know that thou dost love me. I in vain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strive to love aught of earth or Heaven but thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art my first, last, only love; nor shall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another even tempt my heart. Like stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A thousand sweet and bright and wondrous fair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A thousand deathless miracles of beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They shall ever pass at all but eyeless distance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And never mix with thy love; but be lost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All, meanly in its moonlike lustrousness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How still the air is! the tree tops stir not:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But stand and peer on Heaven’s bright face as though</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It slept and they were loving it: they would not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have the skies see them move for summers; would they?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See that sweet cloud! It is watching us, I am certain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What have we here to make thee stay one second?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Away! thy sisters wait thee in the west,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blushing bridemaids of the sun and sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would I were like thee, thou little cloud,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever to live in Heaven: or seeking earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To let my spirit down in drops of love:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sleep with night upon her dewy lap;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, the next dawn, back with the sun to Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so on through eternity, sweet cloud!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot but think that some senseless things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are happy. Often and often have I watched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A gossamer line sighing itself along</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The air, as it seemed; and so thin, thin and bright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looking as woven in a loom of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I have envied it, I have, and followed;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft watched the sea-bird’s down blown o’er the wave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now touching it, now spirited aloft,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now out of sight, now seen⁠—till in some bright fringe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of streamy foam, as in a cage, at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A playful death it dies, and mourned its death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But thinkest thou the future is a state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More positive than this; or that it can be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aught but another present, full of cares,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And toils, perhaps, and duties; that the soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will ever be more nigh to God than now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save as may seem from mind’s debility:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just as the sun, from weakness of the eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the illusions made by matter’s forms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seems hot and wearied resting on the hill?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It would be well, I think, to live as though</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more were to be looked for; to be good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because it is best, here; and leave hope and fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For lives below ourselves. If earth persuades not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I owe prayer and praise and love to God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While all I have He gives, will Heaven? will Hell?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No; neither, never!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I think not all with thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I not heard thee hint of spirit-friends?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where are they now?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! close at hand, mayhap.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have a might immortal; and can ken</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With angels. Neither sky nor night nor earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hinder me. Through the forms of things I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their essences; and thus, even now, behold⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But where I cannot show to thee⁠—far round,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nature herself⁠—the whole effect of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind, matter, motion, heat, time, love, and life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And death and immortality; those chief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And first-born giants all are there; all parts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All limbs of her their mother; she is all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what does she?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Produce: it is her life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The three named last, life, death, deathlessness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glide in elliptic path round all things made⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For none save God can fill the perfect whole:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And are but to eternity as is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The horizon to the world. At certain points</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each seems the other; now, the three are one;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, all invisible; and now, as first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Moving in measured round.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How look these beings?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! Life looks gaily and gloomily in turns;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With a brow chequered like the sward, by leaves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Between which the light glints; and she, careless, wears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A wreath of flowers⁠—part faded and part fresh.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Death is beautiful and sad and still:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She seems too happy; happier far than life⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In but one feeling, apathy: and on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her chill white brow frosts bright, a braid of snow.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And Immortality?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She looks alone;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though she would not know her sisterhood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And on her brow a diadem of fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Matched by the conflagration of her eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Outflaming even that eye which in my sleep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beams close upon me till it bursts from sheer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’erstrainedness of sight, burns.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What do they?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Each strives to win me to herself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Opens her sweet white arms and whispers, peace!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come say thy sorrows in this bosom! This</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will never close against thee; and my heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though cold, cannot be colder much than man’s.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come! All this soon must end; and soon the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall perish leaf by leaf, and land by land;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flower by flower⁠—flood by flood⁠—and hill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By hill, away; Oh! come, come! Let us die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say that thou wilt not die!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I love Death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Immortality, with finger spired,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Points to a distant, giant world⁠—and says</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There, there is my home! Live along with me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Canst see that world?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Just⁠—a huge shadowy shape;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It looks a disembodied orb⁠—the ghost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of some great sphere which God hath stricken dead:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like a world which God hath thought⁠—not made.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Follow her Festus! Does she speak again?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She never speaks but once; and now, in scorn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Points to this dim, dwarfed, misbegotten sphere.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why let her pass?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That is the great world-question.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life would not part with me; and from her brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tearing her wreath of passion-flowers, she flung</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It round my neck and dared me struggle then.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I never could destroy a flower: and none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fairest hands like thine can grace with me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The plucking of a rose. And Life, sweet Life!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vowed she would crop the world for me and lay it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Herself before my feet even as a flower.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when I felt that flower contained thyself⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One drop within its nectary kept for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I lost all count of those strange sisters three;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And where they be I know not. But I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One who is more to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast this power and knowledge. I but hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It comes from good hands; if it be not thine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Own force of mind. It is much less what we do</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than what we think, which fits us for the future.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wish we had a little world to ourselves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With none but we two on it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And if God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gave us a star, what could we do with it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that we could without it? Wish it not!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ll not wish then for stars; but I could love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some peaceful spot where we might dwell unknown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where home-born joys might nestle round our hearts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As swallows round our roofs⁠—and blend their sweets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like dewy-tangled flowerets in one bed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The sweetest joy, the widest woe is love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The taint of earth, the odour of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is in it. Would that I were aught but man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The death of brutes, the immortality</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of fiend or angel, better seems than all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The doubtful prospects of our painted dust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all Morality can teach is⁠—Bear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all Religion can inspire is⁠—Hope!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is enough. Fruition of the fruit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the great Tree of Life, is not for earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stars are its fruit, its lightest leaf is life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart hath many sorrows beside love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea many as the veins which visit it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love of aught on earth is not its chief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor ought to be. Inclusive of them all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is the one main sorrow, life;⁠—for what</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can spirit, severed from the great one, God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Feel but a grievous longing to rejoin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its infinite⁠—its author⁠—and its end?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet is life a thing to be beloved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And honored holily, and bravely borne.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A man’s life may be all ease, and his death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By some dark chance, unthought of agony:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or life may be all suffering, and decease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A flower-like sleep;⁠—or both be full of woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or each comparatively painless. Blame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not God for inequalities like these!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They may be justified. How canst thou know?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They may be only seeming. Canst thou judge?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They may be done away with utterly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By loving, fearing, knowing God the Truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all distress of spirit, grief of heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bodily agony, or mental woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rebuffs and vain assumptions of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the poor spite of weak and wicked souls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think thou on God! Think what he underwent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And did for us as man. Weigh thou thy cross</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Christs, and judge which were the heavier.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Joy even in thine anguish!⁠—such was His,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But measurelessly more. Thy suffering</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assimilateth thee to Him. Rejoice!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think upon what thou shalt be! Think on God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then ask thyself, what is the world, and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its mountainous inequalities? Ah, what!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not all equal as dust-atomies?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My soul’s orb darkens as a sudden star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which having for a time exhausted earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And half the Heavens of wonder, mortally</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passes for ever, not eclipsed, consumed;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All but a cloudy vapour darkening there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very spot in space it once illumed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once to myself I seemed a mount of light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now, a pit of night.⁠—No more of this!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here have I lain all day in this green nook,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shaded by larch and hornbeam, ash and yew;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A living well and runnel at my feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wild flowers, dancing to some delicate air;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An urn-topped column and its ivy wreath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Skirting my sight as thus I lie and look</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the blue, unchanging, sacred skies:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, too, gentle Clara by my side,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With lightsome brow and beaming eye, and bright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long glorious locks, which drop upon thy cheek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like goldhued cloudflakes on the rosy morn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! when the heart is full of sweets to o’erflowing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ringing to the music of its love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who but an angel or an hyprocrite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could speak or think of happier states?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clara</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Farewell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remember what thou saidst about the stars. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! why was woman made so fair? or man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So weak as to see that more than one had beaaty?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is impossible to love but one.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet I dare not love thee as I could;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all that the heart most longs for and deserves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passes the soonest and most utterly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The moral of the world’s great fable, life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All we enjoy seems given to deceive,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or may be, undeceive us; who cares which?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when the sum is done, and we have proved it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why work it over and over still again?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not what I would be. Hear me, God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And speak to me in thine invisible likeness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wind, as once of yore. Let me be pure!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! I wish I was a pure child again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ere the clear could trouble me: when life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was sweet and calm as is a sister’s kiss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not the wild and whirlwind touch of passion,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which though it hardly light upon the lip,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With breathless swiftness sucks the soul out of sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that we lose it, and all thought of it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is this life wherein Thou hast founded me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But a bright wheel which burns itself away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Benighting even night with its grim limbs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When it hath done and fainted into darkness?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flesh is but fiction, and it flies away;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gaunt and ghastly thing we bear about us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And which we hate and fear to look upon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is truth; in death’s dark likeness limned⁠—no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
