<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-19" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A visit.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come to the light, love! Let me look on thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let me make sure I have thee. Is it thou?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is this thy hand? Are these thy velvet lips⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy lips so lovable? Nay, speak not yet!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For oft as I have dreamed of thee, it was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy speaking woke me. I will dream no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I alive? And do I really look</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon these soft and sea-blue eyes of thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherein I half believe I can espy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The riches of the sea? These dark rolled looks!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh God! art Thou not glad, too, he is here!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where hast thou been so long? Never to hear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never to see, nor see one who had seen thee⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come now, confess it was not kind to treat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Me in this manner.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I confess, my love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I have been where neither tongue, nor pen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor hand could give thee token where I was;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And seen, but ’tis enough! I see thee now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would rather look upon thy shadow there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than Heaven’s bright thrones for ever.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where hast been?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, am I altered?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nowise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is well.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then in the resurrection we may know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each other. I have been among the worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Angels and spirits bodiless.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Great God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can it be so?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is:⁠—and that both here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And elsewhere. When the stars come, thou shalt see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The track I travelled through the light of night;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where I have been, and whence my visitors.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thou hast been with angels all the while,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And still dost love me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Constantly as now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for the time I did devote my soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To their divine society, I knew</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wouldst forgive, yet dared not trust myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To see thee, or to pen one word, for fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy love should overpower the plan conceived,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And acting, in my mind, of visiting</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirits in their space-embosomed homes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forgive thee! ’tis a deed which merits love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And should I not be proud, too, who can say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For me he left all angels?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I forethought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So thou wouldst say; but with an offering</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came I provided, even with a trophy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of love angelic, given me for thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For angel bosoms know no jealousy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shew me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is of jewels I received</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From one who snatched them from the richest wreck</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of matter ever made, the holiest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And most resplendent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, what could it be?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Jewels are bawbles only; whether pearls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the sea’s lightless depths, or diamonds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Culled from the mountain’s crown, or chrysolith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cat’s eye or moonstone, toys are they at best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Jewels are not of all things in my sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Most precious.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor in mine. It is in the use</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of which they may be made their value lies;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the pure thoughts of beauty they call up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And qualities they emblem. So in that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wearest there, thy cross;⁠—to me it is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suggestive of bright thoughts and hopes in Him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose one great sacrifice availeth all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Living and dead, through all Eternity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not to the wanderer over southern seas</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rises the constellation of the Cross</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More lovelily o’er sky and calm blue wave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than does to me that bright one on thy breast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As diamonds are purest of all things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And but embodied light which fire consumes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And renders back to air, that nought remains⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as the cross is symbol of our creed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So let that ornament signify to thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The faith of Christ, all purity, all light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through fervency resolving into Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each hath his cross, fair lady, on his heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never may thine be heavier or darker</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than that now on thy breast, so light and bright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rising and falling with its bosom-swell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I thank thee for that wish, and for the love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which prompts it⁠—the immeasurable love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know is mine, and I with none would share.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgive me; I have not yet felt my wings.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now have I not been patient? Let me see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My promised present.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Look, then⁠—they are here;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bracelets of chrysoprase.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Most beautiful!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, let me clasp them, dearest, on thine arms;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For these of those are worthy, and are named</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the foundation stones of the bright city,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is to be for the immortal saved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their last and blest abode; and such their hue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The golden green of Paradisal plains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which lie about it boundlessly, and more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Intensely tinted with the burning beauty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God’s eye, which alone doth light that land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than our earth’s cold grass garment with the sun;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though even in the bright, hot, blue-skied East,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where he doth live the life of light and Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where, o’er the mountains, at midday is seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The morning star, and the moon tans at night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cheek of careless sleeper. Take them, love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are no nobler earthly ornaments</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than jewels of the city of the saved.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But how are these of that bright city? I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am eager for their history.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thereof prophetically, and have been⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What I will shew thee presently, when I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Relate the story of the angel who</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gave them to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well; I will wait till then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or any time thou choosest: ’tis enough</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I believe thee always;⁠—but would know,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If not in me too curious to ask,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How came about these miracles? Hast thou raised</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fiend of fiends, and made a compact dark,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sealed with thy blood, symbolic of the soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereby all power is given thee for a time,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All means, all knowledge, to make more secure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy spirit’s dread perdition at the end?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I of such awful stories oft have heard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the unlawful lore which ruins souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Myself have charms, foresee events in dreams;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can prophesy, prognosticate, know well</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The secret ties between many magic herbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mortal feelings, nor condemn myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For knowing what is innocent; but thou!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy helps are mightier far and more obscure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was it with wand and circle, book and scull,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With rites forbid and backward-jabbered prayers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In cross-roads or in churchyard, at full moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by instruction of the ghostly dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That thou hast wrought these wonders, and attained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such high transcendent powers and secrets? Speak!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or is man’ mastery over spirits not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of such a vile and vulgar consequence?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Were not my heart as guiltless of all mirth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is the oracle of an extinct god</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of its priest-prompted answer, I might smile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To list such askings. Mind’s command o’er mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit’s o’er spirit, is the dear effect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And natural action of an inward gift,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Given of God, whereby the incarnate soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath power to pass free out of earth and death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To immortality and Heaven, and mate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With beings of a kind, condition, lot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All diverse from his own. This mastery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Means but communion, the power to quit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life’s little globule here, and coalesce</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the great mass about us. For the rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To raise the Devil were an infant’s task</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To that of raising man. Why, every one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Conjures the Fiend from Hell into himself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Passion chokes or blinds him. Sin is Hell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How dost thou bring a spirit to thee, Festus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is my will which makes it visible.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What are those like whom thou hast seen?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The denizens of other worlds, arrayed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In diverse form and feature, mostly lovely;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In limb and wing ethereal finer far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than an ephemeris’ pinion; others, armed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With gleaming plumes, that might o’ercome an air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of adamantine denseness, pranked with fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All are of different offices and strengths,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Powers, orders, tendencies, in like degrees</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As men, with even more variety;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of different glories, duties, and delights.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as the light of meteor, satellite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Planet and comet, sun, star, nebula,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Differ, and nature also, so do theirs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With them is neither need, nor sex, nor age,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor generation growth, decay, nor death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or none whom I have known; there may be such.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mature they are created and complete,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or seem to be. Perfect from God they come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet have they different degrees of beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even as strength and holy excellence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some seem of milder and more feminine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nature than others, Beauty’s proper sex,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shewn but by softer qualities of soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More lovable than awful, more devote</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To deeds of individual piety,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And grace, than mighty missions fit to task</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sublimest spirits, or the toil intense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of cultivating nations of their kind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or working out from the problem of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The great results of God⁠—result, sum, cause.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These ofttimes charged with delegated powers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Formative or destructive; those, in chief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ordained to better and to beautify</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Existence as it is; with careful love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tend upon particular worlds or souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Warning and training whom they love, to tread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soft and blossom-bordered, silvery paths,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which lead and lure the soul to Paradise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making the feet shine which do walk on them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While each doth God’s great will alike, and both</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With their whole nature’s fulness love His works.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love them lifts the soul to Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me, then!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whence come they?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Many of them come from orbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherein the rudest matter is more worth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fair than queenly gem; the dullest dust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath their feet is rosy diamond:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Others, direct from Heaven; but all in high</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And serious love towards those to whom they come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None but the blest are free to visit where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They choose. The lost are slaves for ever; here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never but on their Master’s merciless</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Business, nor elsewhere. Still sometimes with these</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dark spirits have I held communion,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in their soul’s deep shadow, as within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mountain cavern of the moon, conversed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With them, and wormed from them the gnawing truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of their extreme perdition; marking oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nature revealed by torture, as a leaf</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unfolds itself in fire and writhes the while,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Burning, jet unconsumed. Others there are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come garlanded with flowers unwithering,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or crowned with sunny jewels, clad in light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And girded with the lightning, in their hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wands of pure rays or arrowy starbeams; some</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bright as the sun self-lit, in stature tall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strong, straight and splendid as the golden reed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereby the height, and length, and breadth, and depth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the descendant city of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In which God sometime shall make glad with man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were measured by the angel; (the same reed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith our Lord was mocked that angel found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Close by the Cross and took; God made it gold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now it makes the sceptre of His Son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over all worlds; the sole bright rule of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The measure of immortal life, the scale</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of power, love, bliss, and glory infinite):⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some gorgeous and gigantic, who with wings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wide as the wings of armies in the field</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drawn out for death, sweep over Heaven, and eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep, dark as sea-worn caverns, with a torch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At the end, far back, glaring. Some with wings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like an unfainting rainbow, studded round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With stones of every hue and excellence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Writ o’er with mystic words which none may read,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But those to whom their spiritual state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gives correlative meaning, fit thereto.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some of these visit me in dreams; with some</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I made one in visions, in their own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Abodes of brightness, blessedness, and power:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And know moreover I shall joy with them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere long their sacred guest, through ages yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To come, in worlds not now perhaps create,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As they have been mine here: and some of them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In unimaginable splendours I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have walked with through their winged worlds of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Double and triple particoloured suns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And systems circling each the other, clad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In tints of light and air, whereto this earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath nothing like, and man no knowledge of:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orbs heaped with mountains, to the which ours are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mere grave-mounds, and their skies flowered with stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Violet, rose or pearl-hued, or soft blue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Golden or green, the light now blended, now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alternate; many moons and planets, full,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Crescent, or gibbous-faced, illumining</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In periodic and intricate beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At once those strange and most felicitous skies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How I should love to visit other worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or see an angel!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wilt thou now?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I dare not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not now at least. I am not in the mood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere I behold a spirit I would pray.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Light as a leaf thy step, or arrowy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Footing of breeze upon a waveless pool;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sudden and soft, too, like a waft of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The beautiful immortals come to me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, ever lovely, ever welcome they!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But why art thou, of all men, favoured thus?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To say there is a mystery in this</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or aught is only to confess God. Speak!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is God’s will that I possess this power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus to attract great spirits to mine own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As steel magnetically charged draws steel;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Himself the magnet of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound whom all spirits tremble, and towards whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All tend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If as thou sayest, it is good:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May it be an immortal good to thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is no keeping back the power we have.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He hath no power who hath not power to use.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some of these bodies whom I speak of are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pure spirits, others bodies soulical:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For spirit is to soul as wind to air.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They give me all I seek, and at a wish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would furnish treasures, thrones, or palaces;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But all these things have I eschewed, and chosen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Command of mind alone, and of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unbodied and all-lovely.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is not this</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pleasure too much for mortal to be good?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All pleasure is with Thee, God! elsewhere, none.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not silver-ceiled hall nor golden throne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Set thick with priceless gems, as Heaven with stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or the high heart of youth with its bright hopes;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor marble gleaming like the white moonlight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ’twere an apparition of a palace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inlaid with light as is a waterfall;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not rainbow-pinions coloured like yon cloud,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun’s broad banner o’er his western tent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can match the bright imaginings of a child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the glories of his coming years;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How equal, then, the full-assured faith</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of him to whom the Saviour hath vouchsafed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heaven of His bosom? What can tempt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In its performance equal to that promise?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My soul stands fast to Heaven as doth a star;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And only God can move it who moves all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are who might have soared to what I spurned;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And like to heavenly orders human souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some fitted most for contemplation, some</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For action, these for thrones, and those for wheels.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell me what they discourse upon, these angels?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They speak of what is past or coming, less</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of present things or actions. Some say most</span>
								<br/>
								<span>About the future, others of the gone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dim traditions of Eternity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Time’s first golden moments. One there was⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From whose sweet lips elapsed as from a well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Continuously, truths which made my soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As they sank in it, fertile with rich thoughts⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spake to me oft of Heaven, and our talk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was of divine things always⁠—angels, Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Salvation, immortality, and God;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The different states of spirits and the kinds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Being in all orbs, or physical,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or intellectual. I never tired</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Preferring questions, but at each response</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My soul drew back, sealike, into its depths</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To urge another charge on him. This spirit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came to me daily for a long, long time,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whene’er I prayed his presence. Many a world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He knew right well which man’s eye never yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath marked, nor ever may mark while on earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet grew his knowledge every time he came.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His thoughts all great and solemn and serene,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the immensest features of an orb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose eyes are blue seas, and whose clear broad brow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some cultured continent, came ever round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From truth to truth⁠—day bringing as they came.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He was to me an all-explaining spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Teaching divine things by analogy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With mortal and material. Thus of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He shewed, as the three primal rays make one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sole beam of Light, so the three Persons make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One God; neither without the other is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>However bright or beautiful itself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The theme he touched, he made it more so by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His own light, like a fire-fly on a flower.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And one of all I knew the most of, yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The least can say of him; for full oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our thoughts drown speech, like to a foaming force,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which thunders down the echo it creates.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet must I somewhat tell of him. He was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirit evil of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impersonate. Oh, strange and wild to know!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perdition and destruction dwelt in him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to a pair of eagles in one nest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hollow and wasteful as a whirlwind was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His soul; his heart as earthquake, and engulphed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>World upon world. In him they disappeared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As might a morsel in a lion’s maw,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world which met him rolled aside to let him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pass on his piercing path. His eyeballs burned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Revolving lightnings like a world on fire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their very night was fatal as the shade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Death’s dark valley. And his space-spread wings⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wide as the wings of Darkness when she rose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scowling, and backing upwards, as the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Giant of Light, first donned his burning crown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gladdening all Heaven with bis inaugural smile⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were stained with the blood of many a starry world:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, I have seen him seize upon an orb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cast it careless into worldless space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I might cast a pebble in the sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His might upon Ibis earth was wondrous most.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He stood a match for mountains. Ocean’s depths</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He clove unto their rock-bed, as a sword,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through blood and muscle to the central bone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With one swoop of his arm. His brow was pale⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pale as the life-blood of the undying worm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which writhes around its frame of vital fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His voice blew like the desolating gust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which strips the trees, and strews the earth with death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His words were ever like a wheel of fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rolling and burning this way now, now that:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now whirling forth a blinding beam, now soft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deep as Heaven’s own luminous blue⁠—and now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to a oonqueror’s chariot wheel they came,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sodden with blood and slow, revolving death:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every tone fell on the ear and heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heavy and harsh and startling, like the first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Handful of mould cast on the coffined dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though he claimed them his.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dost recognize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The portrait, lady?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Festus! who is this?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What portrait?⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wherefore comest thou? Did I not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Claim privacy one evening?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, indeed⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I simply called, as I was on my way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Jupiter⁠—and he’s a mouthful, mind;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To keep the proverbs, too, in countenance.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Any commands for our planetary friends?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I go. Make my excuses! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A mistake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dearest; but rectified. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Apart.</i> And he is gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell hath its own again. Some sorrow chills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever the spirit, like a cloudlet nursed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the star-giant’s bosom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell me, love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More of these angels!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There was one I loved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of those immortals, of a lofty air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dimly divine and sad, and side by side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Him whom I spake of first she oft would stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With her fair form⁠—shadow illuminate⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the dark moon in the young one’s arms.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She never murmured at the doom which made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sorrow that contained her, as the air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Infolds the orb whereon we dwell, but spake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God’s will alway as most good and wise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She had but little pleasure; but her all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such as it was, was in devising plans</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of bliss to come, or in the tales of Time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the sweet early earth. She was in truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our earth’s own angel. Ofttimes would she dwell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With long and luminous sweetness on her theme,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwearying, unpausing, as a world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun would rise and set; the soul-like moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In passive beauty and receptive light⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Absorbing inspiration from the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As doth from God His prophet ceaselessly⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She too would rise and set; and the far stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The third estate of Light, complete the round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the divine day;⁠—still our angel spake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And still I listened to the eloquent tongue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which e’en on earth retained the tone of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadow of a cloud upon a lake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er which the wind hath all day held his breath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is not more calm and fair than her dear face⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So sweetly sad and so consolingly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When she spake even on the end of earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that her eye grew darker, and her brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brighter with thought, as with galactic light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mid Heaven when clearest, at such times, not I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had known that earth were dearer unto her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than other of the visitants divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which hallow oft mine hours;⁠—save, too, that then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though to touch but on that topic had,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Torpedo-like, numbed thought, she would straight cease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All converse suddenly, and kneel and seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inwardly praying with much power⁠—rise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vanish into Heaven. My mind is full</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of stories she hath told me of our world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No word an angel utters lose I ever.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One I will tell thee now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Do! let me hear!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy talk is the sweet extract of all speech,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And holds mine ear in blissful slavery.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas on a lovely summer afternoon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Close by the grassy marge of a deep tarn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nigh halfway up a mountain, that we stood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I and the angel, when she told me this.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Above us rose the grey rocks, by our side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forests of pines, and the bright breaking wavelets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came crowding, dancing to the brink, like thoughts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto our lips. Before us shone the sun.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The angel waved her hand ere she began,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As bidding earth be still. The birds ceased singing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the trees breathing, and the lake smoothed down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each shining wrinkle and the wind drew off.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time leant him o’er his scythe and, listening, wept.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The circling world reined in her lightning pace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A moment; Ocean hushed his snow-maned steeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And a cloud hid the sun, as does the face</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A meditative hand: then spake she thus:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scarce had the sweet song of the morning stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which rang through space at the first sign of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our earth gave, springing from the lap of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On to her orbit, when from Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came down a white-winged host; and in the east,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where Eden’s Pleasance was, first furled their wings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alighting like to snowflakes. There they built,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the riches of the soil around,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A house to God. There were the ruby rocks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there, in blocks, the quarried diamonds lay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Opal and emerald mountain, amethyst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sapphire and chrysoprase, and jacinth stood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the still action of a star, all light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like sea-based icebergs, blinding. These, with tools</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tempered in Heaven, the band angelic wrought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And raised, and fitted, having first laid down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deep foundations of the holy dome</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On bright and beaten gold; and all the while</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A song of glory hovered round the work</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like rainbow round a fountain. Day and night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Went on the hallowed labor till ’twas done.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet but thrice the sun set, and but thrice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The moon arose; so quick is work divine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tower, and roof, and pinnacle, without,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were solid diamond. Within, the dome</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was eyeblue sapphire, sown with gold-bright stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And clustering constellations; the wide floor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All emerald, earthlike, veined with gold and silver,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Marble and mineral of every hue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And marvellous quality, the meanest thing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where all things were magnificent, was gold⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The plainest. The high altar there was shaped</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of one ruby heartlike. Columned round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With alabaster pure was all. And now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So high and bright it shone in the midday light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It could be seen from Heaven. Upon their thrones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun-eyed angels hailed it, and there rose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A hurricane of blissfulness in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which echoed for a thousand years. One dark,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One solitary and foreseeing thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passed, like a planet’s transit o’er the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Across the brow of God; but soon he smiled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Towards earth, and that smile did consecrate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The temple to Himself. And they who built</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bowed themselves down and worshipped in its walls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High on the front were writ these words⁠—to God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heavenly built this for the earthly ones,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That in his worship both might mix on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As afterward they hoped to do in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had man stood good in £den this had been:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He fell and Eden vanished. The bright place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reared by the angels of all precious things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For the joint worship of the sons of earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Heaven, fell with him, on the very day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He should have met God and His angels there⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very day he disobeyed and joined</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The host of death blackbannered, Eden fell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The groves and grounds, which God the Lord’s own feet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had hallowed; the all-hued and odorous bowers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where angels wandered, wishing them in Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The trees of life and knowledge⁠—trees of death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And madness, as they proved to man⁠—all fell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that bright fane fell first. No death-doomed eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gazed on its glory. Earthquakes gulped it down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Temple of the Angels, vast enough</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hold air nations worshipping at once,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lay in its grave; the cherubs’ flaming swords</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sole sad torches of its funeral.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till at the flood, when the world’s giant heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Burst like a shell, it scattered east and west,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And far and wide, among less noble ruins,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fragments of that angel-builded fane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was in Eden, and of which all stones</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That now are precious, were; and still shall be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gathered again unto a happier end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the pure City of the Son of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And temple yet to be rebuilt in Zion;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, though once overthrown, and once again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Torn down to its foundations, in the quick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of earth, shall soul-like yet re-rise from ruin⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High, holy, happy, stainless as a star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imperishable as eternity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>—The angel ended; and the winds, waves, clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun, the woods, and merry birds went on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As theretofore, in brightness, strength and music.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One scarce could think that earth at all had fallen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To look upon her beauty. If the brand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sin were on her brow, it was surely hid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In natural art from every eye but God’s.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things seemed innocence and happiness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I was all thanks. And look! the angel said,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take these, and give to one thou lovest best:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine own hands saved from them the shining ruin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof I have late told thee; and she gave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What now are greenly glowing on thine arms.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere I could answer, she was up, star-high!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Winging her way through Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How shall I thank thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough, or that kind angel who hath made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gift to me dear doubly? I shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Afraid almost to wear them, but would not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Part with them for the treasures of all worlds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shew my thanks?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Love me as now, dear beauty!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Present or absent always, and ’twill be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More than enough of recompense for me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast met that angel late-while?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet oft methinks I see her, catch a glimpse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of her sun-circling pinions or bright feet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which fitter seem for rainbows than for earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Heaven’s triumphal arch, more firm and pure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than the world’s whitest marble;⁠—see her seated oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On some high snowy cloud-cliff, harp in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Singing the sun to sleep as down he lays</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His head of glory on the rocking deep:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so sing thou to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helen</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There, rest thyself. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Oh! not the diamond starry bright</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Can so delight my view,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth the moonstone’s changing light</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And gleamy glowing hue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now blue as Heaven, and then anon</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">As golden as the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It hath a charm in every change⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In brightening, darkening, one.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And so with beauty, so with love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And everlasting mind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It takes a tint from Heaven above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And shines as it’s inclined;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or from the sun, or towards the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">With blind or brilliant eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And only lights as it reflects</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The life-light of the sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sleeps! The fate of many a gracious moral</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This, to be stranded on a drowsy ear.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
