<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—The judgment of Earth.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let all the dead rejoice! their Saviour comes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With clouds of angels circled like a sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Belted with light, and brighter than all light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! He descends and seats Him on His throne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alighting like a new made sun in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world awaits Thee, Lord! Rise, souls of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Buried beneath all ages from the first;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye numbered and unnumbered, loathed and loved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awake to judgment! Rise! the grave no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath power upon ye than the ravening sea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the stars of Heaven. Ye elements!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give back your stolen dead. He claimeth them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose they both were and are, and aye shall be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I come to repay sin with holiness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And death with immortality; man’s soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With God’s Spirit; all evil with all good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All men have sinned; and as for all I died,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All men are saved. Oh! not a single soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Less than the countless all can satisfy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The infinite triumph which to me belongs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who infinitely suffered. Ye elect!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all ye angels, with God’s love informed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who reign with me o’er earth and Heaven, assume</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your seats of judgment. Judge ye all in love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love which God the Father hath to you⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For His Son’s sake, and all shall be forgiven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lord! let us render back to Thee the love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is Thine own: none else is worthy Thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold this day I dwell with thee on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en to the last; the next shall be in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where ye shall meet the Father, and remain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the Eternal presence, He through me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blessing all spirits overflowingly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dear Lord, our God and Saviour! for Thy gifts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world were poor in thanks, though every soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were to do nought but breathe them, every blade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of grass and every atomie of earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To utter it like dew. Thy ways are plain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only in Thine own light. And this great day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unveils all nature’s laws and miracles⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All to Thee all as one. Thy death was life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy judgment is all mercy, Lord of Love!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world’s incomprehensible no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To man, but all is bright as new-born star.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son of God</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Book of Life is opened. Heaven begins.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
