<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-11" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A ruined temple.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here will I worship solely.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis a fane</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once sacred to the Sun.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It matters not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What false god here hath falsely been adored,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or what life-hating rites these walls have viewed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The truly holy soul, which hath received</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The unattainable, can hallow hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now to the only true and Triune God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These walls shall echo praise, if never yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring me a morsel of the fire without;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I will make a sacred offering</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To God, as though the High Priest of the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He lacks not consecration at best hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom Thou hast hallowed, Lord, by choice; and these,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The elements I offer, Thou hast made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Holy, by making them.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo! here is fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will await thee in the air.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Withdraw!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine, Lord! are all the elements and worlds;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun is Thy bright servant, and the moon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy servant’s servant;⁠—the round rushing earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lifeful air, the thousand winged winds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heaven-kinned fire, the continental clouds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sea broad breasted, and the tranced lake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Th rich arterial rivers, and the hills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which wave their woody tresses in the breeze,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In grateful undulation, all are Thine;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine are the snow-robed mountains circling earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the white spirits God the Saviour’s throne;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine the bright secrets, central in all orbs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rudimental mysteries of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun-starred night, the ever-maiden morn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The all-prevailing day, consummate eve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confess them Thine through the perpetual world:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All art hath wrought from earth, or science lured</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From truth, like flame out of the fire cloud, are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine;⁠—Thine the glory, all belongs to Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Finite, indefinite and infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As mountains to a world, as worlds to Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The high doomed city and the toilful town</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And early hamlet⁠—all that live or die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That flourish or decay, that change, or stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before Thy face, unchanged, exist for Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or are not at Thy bidding; Thine, all souls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Atom and world, the universe is Thine!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou canst as easily turn Thy kindest eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From comprehending the bright Infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To this crushed temple, where the wild flower decks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its earthquake-rifted walls, and the birds build</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In corners of its columned capitals⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to this crumbling heart I offer here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As trust Thine own Eternity. Behold!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accept, I pray Thee, Lord! this sacrifice;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These elemental offerings simple, pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which in the name of man I make to Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Formless, save prostrate soul and kneeling heart⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In token of Thy perfect monarchy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all comprising mercy. These are they!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A flowery turf, a branch, a burning coal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cup of water and an empty bowl;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This air-filled bowl is typic of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou fillest with Thy spirit, and the soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Receptive of Thy life-conferring truth;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This the symbolic element wherefrom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are to be reborn, wherein made pure;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those whom Thou choosest are to be redeemed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the mighty multitudes of men;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet all as of one nature be redeemed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This coal, torn flaming from the earth, proclaims</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy sin-consuming mercy as of earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And may our souls ever aspire to Thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As these pale flames unto the stars; this turf</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is as the earthy nature and abode</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We would subject to Thee; and lieth here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The representative of every star</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And world-extended matter! Lord! this branch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which waveth high o’er all, oh, let it sign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine own Eternal Son’s humanity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was on earth, yet ever lives in Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Redemptive of all Being. Golden Branch!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which, in the eld-time, seer’s and sybil’s words,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full of dark central thought and mystic truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Foretold should overspread the spirit world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with its fruit heal every wound of Death⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tree of eternal life, Thee all adore.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accept this prayer, O Saviour! that if men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can nothing do but sin, Thou mayst forgive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The creature crime, and bring back all to Thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art the one who made the universe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet didst Thou walk on earth; Thou brakest bread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And drankest wine with men, betokening so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine own complete, Divine Humanity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May all obey Thy words and do Thy will!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We praise Thee God, our father; whoso would</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be saved, let him believe in Thee Triune.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou doest all things rightly; all are best,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sorrow, or joy, or power, or suffering.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Providing, therefore, all things that must be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ought to be, as Thou dost and hast done,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the beginning even to the end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This heart let cease from prayer, these lips from praise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that which life shall offer pauselessly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now go I forth again, refreshed, consoled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon my time-enduring pilgrimage.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ho! Lucifer!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I wait thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whither next?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As thou wilt, apposite or opposite.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis light translateth night; ’tis inspiration</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Expounds experience; ’tis the west explains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The east: ’tis time unfolds Eternity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
