<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Water and wood⁠—Midnight;</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>, alone.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All things are calm, and fair, and passive. Earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looks as if lulled upon an angel’s lap</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into a breathless dewy sleep: so still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That we can only say of things, they be!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lakelet now, no longer vexed with gusts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Replaces on her breast the pictured moon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pearled round with stars. Sweet imaged scene of time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To come, perchance, when this vain life o’erspent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth may some purer beings’ presence bear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mayhap even God may walk among His saints,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In eminence and brightness like yon moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mildly outbeaming all the beads of light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strung o’er night’s proud dark brow. How strangely fair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon round still star, which looks half suffering from,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And half rejoicing in its own strong fire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making itself a lonelihood of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Deity, where’er in Heaven it dwells.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How can the beauty of material things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So win the heart and work upon the mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unless like-natured with them? Are great things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thoughts of the same blood? They have like effect.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why doubt on mind? What matter how we call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That which all feel to be their noblest part?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even spirits have a better and a worse:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For every thing created must have form.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passions they have, somewhat like thine; but less</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of grossness and that downwardness of soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which men have. It is true they have no earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what they live on is above themselves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There seems a sameness among things; for mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And matter speak, in causes, of one God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The inward and the outward worlds are like;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pure and gross but differ in degree.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tears, feeling’s bright embodied form, are not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More pure than dewdrops, Nature’s tears, which she</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sheds in her own breast for the fair which die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun insists on gladness; but at night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When he is gone, poor Nature loves to weep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is less real difference among things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than men imagine. They overlook the mass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fasten each on some particular crumb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Because they feel that they can equal that,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of doctrine, or belief, or party cause.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That is the madness of the world⁠—and that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I remove.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is imbecility,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not madness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! the brave and good who serve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A worthy cause can only one way fail;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By perishing therein. Is it to fail?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No; every great or good man’s death is a step</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Firm set towards their end⁠—the end of being;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is the good of all and love of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world must have great minds, even as great spheres</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or suns, to govern lesser restless minds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While they stand still and burn with life; to keep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Them in their places, and to light and heat them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I desire immortal life for aught,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is to learn the mystery of mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And somewhat more of God. Let others rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Systems or succour saints, if such things please;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To live like light or die in light like dew,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Either! I should be blest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It may not be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For as we do not see the sun himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is but the light about him, like a ring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of glory round the forehead of a saint, so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God thou wilt never see. His unveiled love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were terrible, too mud for man to meet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men have a claim on God; and none who hath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A heart of kindness, reverence and love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But dare look God in the face and ask His smile.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He dwells in no fierce light⁠—no cloud of flame;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if it were, Faith’s eye can look through Hell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And through the solid world. We must all think</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On God. Yon water must reflect the sky.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Midnight! Day hath too much light for us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To see things spiritually. Mind and Night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will meet, though in silence, like forbidden lovers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With whom to see each other’s sacred form</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must satisfy. The stillness of deep bliss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sound as the silence of the high hill-top</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where thunder finds no echo⁠—like God’s voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the worldling’s proud, cold, rocky heart⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fills full the sky; and the eye shares with Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That look, so like to feeling, which the bright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And glorious things of Nature ever wear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is much to think and feel of things beyond</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This earth; which lie, as we deem, upwards⁠—far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the day’s glare and riot⁠—they are Night’s!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! could we lift the future’s sable shroud!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behind a shroud what shouldst thou see but death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Spirit is like the thread whereon are strung</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The beads or worlds of life. It may be here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may be there that I shall live again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In yon strange world whose long nights know no star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But seven fair maidlike moons attending him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perfect his sky⁠—perchance in one of those⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But live again I shall wherever it be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We long to learn the future⁠—love to guess.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The science of the future is to man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But what the shadow of the wind might be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such thoughts are vain and useless.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forced oh us.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All things are of necessity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the good are never fatalists. The bad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone act by necessity, they say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It matters not what men assume to be;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or good, or bad, they are but what they are.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is necessity? Are we, and thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all the worlds, and the whole infinite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We cannot see, but working out God’s thoughts?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And have we no self-action? Are all God?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then hath He sin and all absurdity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet, if created Being have free-will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it not wrong to judge it may traverse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s own high will, and yet impossible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To think on’t otherwise?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It may be so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All creature wills, and all their ends and powers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must come within the boundless scope of God’s.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And all our powers are but weaknesses</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To what we shall have, and to that God hath.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Doth not the wish, too, point the likelihood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of life to come?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Boys wish that they were kings.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so with thee. A deathless spirit’s state,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freed from gross form and bodily weightiness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seems kingly by the side of souk like thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And boys and men will likely both be balked.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What if it be, that spirit, after death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is loosed like flesh into its elements?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worlds which man hath constellated, hold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No fellowship in nature; nor perchance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As he hath systematised life, mind and soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But sooth to say, I know not aught of this.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have no kind. No nature like to me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exists. And human spirits must at least</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sleep till the day of doom, if it ever be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast never known one free from body?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why seek then to destroy them?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is my part.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let ruin bury ruin. Let it be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe here, woe there, woe, woe, be everywhere!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not for me to know, nor thee, the end</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of evil. I inflict and thou must bear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The arrow knoweth not its end and aim.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I keep rushing, ruining along</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a great river rich with dead men’s souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For if I knew, I might rejoice; and that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me by Nature is forbidden. I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor joy nor sorrow; but a changeless tone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sadness like the nightwind’s is the strain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of what I have of feeling. I am not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As other spirits⁠—but a solitude</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even to myself; I the sole spirit sole.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Can none of thine immortals answer me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None, mortal!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where then is thy vaunted power?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is better seen as thus I stand apart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From all. Mortality is mine⁠—the green</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unripened universe. But as the fruit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Matures, and world by world drops mellowed off</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wrinkling stalk of Time, as thine own race</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath seen of stars now vanished⁠—all is hid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From me. My part is done. What after comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know not more than thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Raise me a spirit!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awake ye dead! out with the secret, death!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The grave hath no pride nor the rise-again.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let each one bring the bane whereof he died.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring the man his, the maiden hers! Oh! half</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mankind are murderers of themselves or souls.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, what is life but lingering suicide?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wake, dead! Ye know the truth; yet there ye lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All mingling, mouldering, perishing together</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like, run sand in the hour-glass of old Time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death is the mad world’s asylum. There is peace;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destruction’s quiet and equality.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Night brings out stars as sorrow shows as truths:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though many, yet they help not; bright, they light not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are too late to serve us: and sad things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are aye too true. We never see the stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till we can see nought but them. So with truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet if one would look down a deep well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even at noon, we might see those same stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far fairer than the blinding blue⁠—the truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Probe the profound of thine own nature, man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou may’st see reflected, e’en in life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worlds, the Heavens, the ages; by and by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The coming come. Then welcome, world-eyed Truth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But there are other eyes men better love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than Truth’s: for when we have her she is so cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And proud, we know not what to do with her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We cannot understand her, cannot teach;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She makes us love her, but she loves not us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And quits us as she came and looks back never.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherefore we fly to Fiction’s warm embrace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With her to relax and bask ourselves at ease;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, in her loving and unhindering lap</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Voluptuously lulled, we dream at most</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On death and truth: she knows them, loves them not;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore we hate them and deny them both.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Call up the dead!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let rest while rest they may!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For free from pain and from this world’s wear and tear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may be a relief to them to rot;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And it must be that at the day of doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If mortals should take up immortal life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They will curse me with a thunder which shall shake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun from out the socket of his sphere.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The curse of all created. Think on it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Those souls thou mean’st whom thou hast ruined, damned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor only those; when once the virgin bloom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of soul is soiled⁠—and rudely hath my hand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swept o’er the swelling clusters of all life⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Little it matters whether crushed or touched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scarcely: each speaks the spoiler hath been there.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The saved, the lost, shall curse me both alike:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God too shall curse me, and I, I, myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That curse is ever greatening⁠—quick with hell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The coming consummation of all woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O man, be happy! Die and cease for ever!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why wear we not the shroud alway, that robe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which speaks our rank on earth, our privilege?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To know I have a deathless soul I would lose it</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Believest thou all I tell thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All, I do.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stringing the stars at random round her head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a pearl network, there she sits⁠—bright night!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love night more than day⁠—she is so lovely.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I love night the most because she brings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My love to me in dreams which scarcely lie;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! all but truth and lovelier oft than truth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let me have dreams like these, sweet Night, for ever,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I shall wake no more; an endless dream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of love and holy beauty ’mid the stars.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I see thy heart and I will grant thy wish.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have lied to thee. I have command over spirits.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom wilt thou that I call?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mine Angela!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is an Angel ever by thine hand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What seest thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is my love! It is she!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My glory! spirit! beauty, let me touch thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, do not shrink back: well then I am wrong:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou didst not use to shrink from me, my love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Angela! dost thou hear me? Speak to me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou art there⁠—looking alive and dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy beauty is then incorruptible.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I thought so, oft as I have looked on thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art too much even now for me as once.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot gather what I raved to say;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor why I had thee hither. Stay, sweet sprite!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dear art thou to me now, as in that hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When first Love’s wave of feeling, spray-like broke</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into bright utterance, and we said we loved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, but I must come to thee. Move no more!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou in death or Heaven or from the stars?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have I done wrong in calling for thee thus?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What art thou? Speak, love; whisper me as wont</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the dear times gone bye; or durst thou not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unfold the mystery of thine and mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Own being? Was it Death who hushed thy lips?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is his cold finger there still? Let me come!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She is not!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thou canst not bring her back.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will not, cannot be without her. Call her!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I call on spirits and I make them come:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But they depart according to their own will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another time and she shall speak with thee⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere long⁠—and she shall show thee where she dwells,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And how doth pass her immortality;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If lengthening decay can so be called.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can lines finite one way be infinite</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another? And yet such is deathlessness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is hard to deem that spirits cease, that thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feeling flesh-like perish in the dust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall we know those again in a future state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom we have known and loved on earth? Say yes!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The mind hath features as the body hath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But is it mind which shall rerise?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Man were</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not man without the mind be had in life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shall all defects of mind and fallacies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of feeling be immortalized? all needs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All joys, all sorrows, be again gone through,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the final crisis be imposed?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall Heaven but be old earth created new?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or earth, treelike, transplanted into Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To flourish by the waters of all life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we within its shade, as heretofore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cropping its fruit, with life-seeds cored at heart?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Man’s nature, physical and psychical,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will be together raised, changed, glorified;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all shall be alike, like God; and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unlike each other, and themselves. The earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall vanish from the thoughts of those she bore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As have the idols of the olden time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From men’s hearts of the present. All delight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all desire, shall be with Heavenly things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the new nature God bestowed on man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then man shall be no more man but an Angel.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When he is dead and buried. What remains⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That such an obscure, contradictory, thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should be perpetuated anywhere?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! if God hates the flesh, why made He it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So beautiful that e’en its semblance maddens?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Am I to credit what I think I have seen?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or am I suffering some deceit of thine?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am explaining, not deluding.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Defining night by darkness, death by dust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I run the gauntlet of a file of doubts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each one of which down hurls me to the ground.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I ask a hundred reasons what they mean,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every one points gravely to the ground,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With one hand, and to Heaven with the other.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In vain I shut mine eyes. Truth’s burning beam</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forces them open, and when open, blinds them.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Doubly unhappy!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am too unhappy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To die; as some too way-worn cannot sleep.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Planets and suns, that set themselves on fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By their own rapid self-revolvements, are</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But like some hearts. Existence I despise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shape of man is wearisome; a bird’s,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A worm’s⁠—a whirlwind’s, I would change with aught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time! dash thine hour-glass down. Have done with this!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The course of Nature seems a course of Death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And nothingness the sole substantial thing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Corruption springs from Light: ’tis the same power</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creates, preserves, destroys: the matter which</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It works on, being one ever-changing form⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The living and the dying and the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ll not believe a thing which I have known.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell was made hell for me, and I am mad.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True venom churns the froth out of the lips;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It works, and works like any waterwheel.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she then was the maiden of thy heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well, I have promised. Ye shall meet again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I loved her for that she was beautiful;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that to me she seemed to be all nature</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all varieties of things in one:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would set at night in clouds of tears, and rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All light and laughter in the morning: yea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that she never schooled within her breast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One thought or feeling, but gave holiday</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all; and that she made all even mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In the communion of love: and we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grew like each other for we loved each other⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She, mild and generous as the sun in spring;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I, like earth all budding out with love.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And then, love’s old end, falsehood: nothing worse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hope?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What’s worse than falsehood? to deny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The god which is within us, and in all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is love? Love hath as many vanities</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As charms; and this, perchance, the chief of both:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make our young heart’s track upon the first,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And snowlike fall of feeling which overspreads</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bosom of the youthful maiden’s mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More pure and fair than even its outward type.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If one did thus, was it from vanity?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or thoughtlessness, or worse? Nay, let it pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The beautiful are never desolate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But some one alway loves them⁠—God or man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If man abandons, God himself takes them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thus it was. She whom I once loved died.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lightning loathes its cloud⁠—the soul its clay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can I forget that hand I took in mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pale as pale violets; that eye, where mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And matter met alike divine? ah, no!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May God that moment judge me when I do!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! she was fair: her nature once all spring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deadly beauty like a maiden sword;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Startlingly beautiful. I see her now!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever thou art thy soul is in my mind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy shadow hourly lengthens o’er my brain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And peoples all its pictures with thyself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gone, not forgot⁠—passed, not lost⁠—thou shalt shine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heaven like a bright spot in the sun!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She said she wished to die, and so she died;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, cloudlike, she poured out her love, which was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her life, to freshen this parched heart. It was thus:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I said we were to part, but she said nothing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There was no discord⁠—it was music ceased⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life’s thrilling, bounding, bursting joy. She sat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a house-god, her hands fixed on her knee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And her dark hair lay loose and long around her,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through which her wild bright eye flashed like flint.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She spake not, moved not, but she looked the more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if her eye were action, speech and feeling.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I felt it all; and came and knelt beside her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The electric touch solved both our souls together.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then comes the feeling which unmakes, undoes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which tears the sealike soul up by the roots</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lashes it in scorn against the skies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Twice did I madly swear to God, hand clenched,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That not even He nor death should tear her from me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the saddest and the sorest sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One’s own love weeping;⁠—but why call on God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that the feeling of the boundless bounds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All feeling, as the welkin doth the world?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is this which ones us with the whole and God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then first we wept; then closed and clung together;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And my heart shook this building of my breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a live engine booming up and down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She fell upon me like a snow-wreath thawing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never were bliss and beauty, love and woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ravelled and twined together into madness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As in that one wild hour; to which all else,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The past, is but a picture⁠—that alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is real, and for ever there in front;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making a black blank on one side of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a blind eye. But after that I left her:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And only saw her once ogain alive.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, shall we go?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This moment. I am ready.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farewell ye dear old walks and trees! farewell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye waters! I have loved ye well. In youth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And childhood it hath been my life to drift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Across ye lightly as a leaf; or skim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your waves in yon skiff, swallowlike; or lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a loved locket on your sunny bosom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could I, like you, by looking in myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find mine own Heaven⁠—farewell! Immortal, come!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The morning peeps her blue eye on the east.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Think not so fondly as thy foolish race,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imagining a Heaven from things without;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The picture on the passing wave call Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wavelet, life⁠—the sands beneath it, death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daily more seen till, lo! the bed is bare.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This fancy fools the world.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let us away!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
