<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—A village feast. Evening.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and others.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is getting dark. One has to walk quite close,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To see the pretty faces that we meet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A disagreeable necessity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Truly.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We’ll rest upon this bridge. I am tired.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon tall slim tree! does it not seem as made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For its place there, a kind of natural maypole?⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond, the lighted stalls stored with the good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Things of our childhood’s world, and behind them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shouting showman and the clashing cymbal;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The open doored cottages and blazing hearth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The little ones running up with naked feet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cake in either hand, to their mother’s lap⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Old and young laughing, schoolboys with their play-things,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clowns cracking jokes, and lasses with sly eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the smile settling in their sunflecked cheeks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like noon upon the mellow apricot;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make up a scene I can for once give in to.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It must please all, the social and the selfish.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are they not happy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, it matters not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They seem so: that’s enough.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But not the same.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet truth and falsehood meet in seeming, like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The falling leaf and shadow on the pool’s face.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And these are joys, like beauty, but skin deep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Remove all such and what’s the joy of earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis they create the appetite of life⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give zest and relish to the lot of millions.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And take the taste for them away⁠—what’s left?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dry ungainly skeleton of soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Power is aye above the soul and joy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Below it. Pleasure men prefer to power.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Children at play.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Play away, good ones!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pity the poor blind man!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here is substantial pity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Man</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Heaven reward you!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Blind as the blue skies after sunset. Blind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I am tired of looking on what is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One might as well see beauty never more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As look upon it with an empty eye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would this, world were over. I am tired.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nought happens but what happens to one’s self;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all hath happened I have wished, and more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our pleasures all pass from us, one by one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With that relief which sighing gives the heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though each sigh leaves it lower. It is sad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To think how few our pleasures really are:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for the which we risk eternal good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s nothing that can satisfy one’s self,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Except one’s self. Well, it is very sad,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by the time we come of age we have felt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In one degree or other all that age</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can offer. We have reaped our field ere noon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rest is reproduction; sowing⁠—reaping⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Losing again. Toil and gain tire alike.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We cannot live too slowly to be good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And happy, nor too much by line and square.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But youth is burning to forestall its nature,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And will not wait for time to ferry it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Over the stream, but flings itself into</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flood, and perishes. And yet, why not?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no charm in time as time, nor good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The long days are no happier than the short ones.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis sometime now since I was here. We leave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our home in youth⁠—no matter to what end;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Study⁠—or strife⁠—or pleasure, or what not:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And coming back in few short years, we find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All as we left it, outside; the old elms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The house, grass, gates, and latchet’s selfsame click:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But lift that latchet⁠—all is changed as doom:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The servants have forgotten our step, and more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than half of those who knew us know us not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Adversity, prosperity, the grave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Play a round game With friends. On some the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath shot its evil eye, and they are passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From honour and remembrance, and a stare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all the mention of their names receives;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And people know no more of them than of</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shapes of clouds at midnight, a year back.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let us move on to where the dancing is;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We soon shall see how happy they all are.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here is a loving couple quarrelling.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there, another. It is quite distressing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See yonder. Two men fighting!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What avail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These vile exceptions to the rule of joy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold the happiness of which thou spakest!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The highest hills are miles below the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so far is the lightest heart below</span>
								<br/>
								<span>True happiness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This is a snakelike world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And always hath its tail within its mouth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if it ate itself, and moralled time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is like yon children’s merry-go-round;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What men admire are carriages and hobbies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which the exalted manikins enjoy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a noisy ragged crowd below</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of urchins drives it round, who only get</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The excitement for their pains⁠—best gain perhaps:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For it is not they who labour that grow dizzy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor sick⁠—that’s for the idle, proud above,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who soon dismount, more weary of enjoying</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than those below of working; and but fair.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is wretchedness or recklessness alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Keeps us alive. Were we happy we should die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet what is death? I like to think on death:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is but the appearance of an apparition.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One ought to tremble; but oughts stand for nothing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hate the thought of wrinkling up to rest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The toothlike aching ruin of the body,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the heart all out, and nothing left but edge.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give me the long high bounding feel of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which cries, let me but leap unto my grave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I’ll not mind the when nor where. We never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Care less for life than when enjoying it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! I should love to die. What is to die?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot hold the meaning more than can</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An oak’s arms clasp the blast that blows on it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is an air-like something which must be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet not to be seen, nor to be touched.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am made up to die; for having been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Every thing, there is nothing left but nothing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hark! here is a ballad-singer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ballad-Singer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All of my own composing!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, Yes⁠—we know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ballad-Singer</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>My gipsy maid! my gipsy maid!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bless and curse the day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lost the light of life, and caught</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The grief which maketh gray.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would that the light which blinded me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had saved me on my way!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>My night-haired love! so sweet she was,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So fair and blithe was she;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her smile was brighter than the moon’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her eyes the stars might see.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I met her by her lane-spread tent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beside a moss-green stone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bade her make, not mock, my fate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My fortune was her own.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art but yet a boy, she said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I a woman grown.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I am a man in love, I cried;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart was early manned:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She smiled, and only drooped her eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then let go my hand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We stood a minute: neither spake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What each must understand.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I told her, so she would be mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And follow where I went,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She straight should have a bridal bower</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Instead of gipsy tent.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Or would she have me wend with her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world between should fall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For her I would fling up faith and friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And name, and fame, and all.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Her smile so bright froze while I spake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ice was in her eye;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So near, it seemed ere touch her heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I might have kissed the sky.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I said that if she loved to rule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or if she longed to reign,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would make her Queen of every race</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which tearhke trode the world’s sad face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or bleed at every vein.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>She laid her finger on her lip,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pointed to the sky;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no God to come, she said:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dost thou not fear to die?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And what is God, I said, to thee?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy people worship not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The good, the happy, and the free,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She said, they need no God.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I looked until I lost mine eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I felt as though I were</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a dark cave, with one weak light⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The light of life⁠—with her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that was wasting fast away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I watched but would not stir.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Again she took my hand in hers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And read it o’er and o’er;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! eyes so young, so sweet, I said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make as they read love’s lore.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>She held my hand⁠—I trembled whilst⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sorely soon I felt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She made the love-cross she foretold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the woe she dealt.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Unhappy I should be she said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And young to death be given;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I told her I believed in her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not in the stars of Heaven.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Hush! we breathe Heaven, she said, and bowed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the stars speak through me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let Heaven, I cried, take care of Heaven!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I only care for thee.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>She shrank: I looked, and begged a kiss:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I knew she had one for me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She would deny me none, she said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But give me none would she.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>My gipsy mind! my gipsy maid!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis three long years like this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since there I gave and got from thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That meeting, parting kiss.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I saw the tears start in her eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And trickle down her cheek,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like falling stars across the sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Escaping from their Maker’s eye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I saw, but spared to speak.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Go, and forget! she said, and slid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Below her lowly tent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not, cannot⁠—hear me, girl!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She heard not, and I went.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>At eve, by sunset, I was there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tent was there no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fire which warmed her flickered still⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fire she sat before.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I stood by it, till through the dark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I saw not where it lay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then like that my heart went out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In ashy grief and gray.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>My gipsy maid! my gipsy maid!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh! let me bless this day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day it was I met thee first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet it shall be and is cursed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou hast gone away.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Another, please⁠—not quite so gloomy, friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Girl</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I wonder if the tale it tells be true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ballad-Singer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I dare say⁠—but you want a merrier.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Every man’s life has its apocrypha;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mine has, at least. I have said more than need be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It happened, too, when I was very young.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We never meet such gipsies when we are old;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet we more complain of youth than age.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now, make a ring, good people. Let me breathe! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Oh! the wee green neuk, the sly green neuk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The wee sly neuk for me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whare the wheat is wavin’ bright and brown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And the wind is fresh and free.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whare I weave wild weeds, and out o’ reeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Kerve whissles as I lay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And a douce low voice is murmurin’ by</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Through the lee-lang simmer day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Oh! the wee green neuk, etc.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And whare a’ things luik as though they lo’ed</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">To languish in the sun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that if they feed the fire they dree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">They wadna ae pang were gone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whare the lift aboon is still as death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And bright as life can be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While the douce low voice says, na, na, na!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">But ye mauna luik sae at me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Oh! the wee green neuk, etc.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Whare the lang rank bent is saft and cule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And freshenin’ till the feet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the spot is sly, and the spinnie high,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Whare my luve and I mak seat:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I teaze her till she rins, and then</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I catch her roun’ the tree;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While the poppies shak’ their heids and blush:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Let ’em blush till they drap, for me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Oh! the wee green neuk, etc.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And all who know such feelings and such scenes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will, I am sure, reward you. Here⁠—take this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Others</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And this, and this⁠—too!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ballad-Singer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thank ye all, good friends!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There’s much that hath no merit but its truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And no excuse but nature. Nature does</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never wrong: ’tis society which sins.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look on the bee upon the wing among flowers;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How brave, how bright his life! Then mark him hived,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cramped, cringing in his self built, social cell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus is it in the world-hive: most where men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lie deep in cities as in drifts⁠—death drifts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nosing each other like a flock of sheep;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not knowing and not caring whence nor whither</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They come or go, so that they fool together.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is quite fair to halve these lives and say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This side is nature’s, that society’s,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When both are side-views only of one thing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am glad to see you come among us, sir.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Parson</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, I have but little comfort in these pastimes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And any heart, turned Godwards, feels more joy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In one short hour of prayer, than e’er was raised</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By all the feasts on earth since their foundation.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But no one will believe us; as if we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had never known the vain things of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor lain and slept in sin’s seducing shade,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Listless, until God woke us; made us feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We should be up and stirring in the sun;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For every thing had to be done ere night.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is all this joy and jollity about?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant there may be no sin. What good is it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I can’t defend these feasts, Sir, and can’t blame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Parson</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good evening, friends! Why, Festus! I rejoice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We meet again. I have a young friend here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A student⁠—who hath staid with us of late.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You would be glad, I know, to know each other.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore be known so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You are a student, Sir.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I profess little; but it is a title</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A man may claim perhaps with modesty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True. All mankind are students. How to live</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And how to die forms the great lesson still.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know what study is: it is to toil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hard, through the hours of the sad midnight watch,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At tasks which seem a systematic curse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And course of bootless penance. Night by night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To trace one’s thought as if on iron leaves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sorrowful as though it were the mode</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And date of death we wrote on our own tombs:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wring a slight sleep out of the couch, and see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The self-same moon, which lit us to our rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her place scarce changed perceptibly in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now light us to renewal of our toils.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This, to the young mind, wild and all in leaf,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which knowledge, grafting, paineth. Fruit soon comes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And more than all our troubles pays us powers;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that we joy to have endured so much:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That not for nothing have we slaved and slain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ourselves almost. And more; it is to strive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bring the mind up to one’s own esteem:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who but the generous fail? It is to think,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While thought is standing thick upon the brain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As dew upon the brow⁠—for thought is brain-sweat;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gathering quick and dark, like storms in summer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until convulsed, condensed, in lightning sport,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It plays upon the heavens of the mind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Opens the hemisphered abysses here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we become revealers to ourselves.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When night hath set her silver lamp on high,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then is the time for study; when Heaven’s light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pours itself on the page, like prophecy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On time, unglooming all its mighty meanings;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is then we feel the sweet strength of the stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And magic of the moon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It’s a bad habit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And wisdom dwells in secret and on high,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As do the stars. The sun’s diurnal glare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is for the daily herd; but for the wise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cold pure radiance of the night-born light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherewith is inspiration of the truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There was a time when I would never go</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rest before the sun rose; and for that,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through a like length of time as that now gone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world shall speak of me six thousand years hence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How know you that the world wont end to-morrow?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Parson</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I now, an early riser, love to hail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dreamy struggles of the stars with light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the recovering breath of earth, sleep-drowned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Awakening to the wisdom of the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And life of light within the tent of Heaven;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To kiss the feet of Morning as she walks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In dewy light along the hills, while they,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All odorous as an angel’s fresh-culled crown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unveil to her their bounteous loveliness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am devote to study. Worthy books</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not companions⁠—they are solitudes:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We lose ourselves in them and all our cares.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The further back we search the human mind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mean in the mass, but in the instance great⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which starting first with Deities and stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And broods of beings earth-born, Heaven-begot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all the bright side of the broad world, now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Boats upon dreams and dim atomic truths,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all for comfort and no more for glory⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nobler and more marvellous it shews.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trifles like these make up the present time;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Iliad and the Pyramids the past.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The future will have glory not the less.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I can conceive a time when the world shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Much better visibly, and when, as far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As social life and its relations tend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men, morals, manners shall be lifted up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To a pure height we know not of nor dream;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When all men’s rights and duties shall be clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And charitably exercised and borne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When education, conscience, and good deeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall have just equal sway, and civil claims;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great crimes shall be cast out, as were of old</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Devils possessing madmen:⁠—Truth shall reign,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nature shall be rethroned, and man sublimed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! then may Heaven come down again to earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dwell with her, as once, like to a friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As like each other as a sword and scythe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! then shall lions mew and lambkins roar!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And having studied⁠—what next?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Much I long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To view the capital city of the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mountains, the great cities, and the sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are each an era in the life of youth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There to get worldly ways, and thoughts, and schemes;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To learn to detect, distrust, despise mankind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ken a false factitious glare amid much</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shines with seeming saintlike purity⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To gloss misdeeds⁠—to trifle with great truths⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To pit the brain against the heart, and plead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wit before wisdom⁠—these are the world’s ways:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It learns us to lose that in crowds which we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must after seek alone⁠—our innocence;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when the crowd is gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not only that:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There all great things are round one. Interests.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mighty and mountainous of estimate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are daily heaped or scattered ’neath the eye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great deeds, great thoughts, great schemes, and crimes, and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is in purpose, or in practice, great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of human nature⁠—there are common things.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men make themselves be deathless as in spite;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if they waged some lineal feud with time;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As though their fathers were immortal, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And immortality an every-day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Accomplishment.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fie! fie! ’tis more for this:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Amid gayer people and more wanton ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give a loose to all the lists of youth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tr your passion flowers high ahead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bind them on your brow as others do.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mornlit revel and the shameless mate⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tabled hues of darkness and of blood⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The published bosom and the crowning smile⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cup excessive; and if aught there be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More vain than these or wanton⁠—that to have⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have all but always in intent, effect,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or fact. Nay, nay, deny it not: I know.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Youth hath a strange and strong desire to try</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All feelings on the heart: it is very wrong,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dangerous, and deadly: strive against it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It might be some old sage was warning us.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Youth might be wise. We suffer less from pains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than pleasures.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I should like to see the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gain that knowledge which is⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Barrener</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than ice; possessing and producing nought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But means and forms of death or vanity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is just as hollow as an eggshell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is a surface not a solid, mind:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all this boasted knowledge of the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me seems but to mean acquaintance with</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Low things, or evil, or indifferent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Much more is said of knowledge than it’s worth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A man may gain all knowledge here, and yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be, after death, as much in the dark as I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What makes you know of living after death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, nothing that I know; and there it is⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But something I am told has told me so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No angel ever came to me to prove it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all my friends have died, and left no ghosts.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All that is good a man may learn from himself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And much, too, that is bad.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Parson</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, let me speak!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aught that is good the soul receives of God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When He hath made it His; and until then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man cannot know, nor do, nor be, aught good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! there is nought on earth worth being known</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But God and our own souls⁠—the God we have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within our hearts; for it is not the hope,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor faith, nap fear, nor notions others have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God can serve us, but the sense and soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We have of Him within us; and, for men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God loves us men each individually,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deals with us in order, soul by soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What are your politics?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Farmer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have my thoughts. I am no party man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I care for measures more than men, but think</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some little may depend upon the men;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Something in fires depends upon the grate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Boy</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What are your colours?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Boy</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Blue as Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Boy</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are yellow as the sun.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Boy</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mine, green as grass.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Boy</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Green’s forsaken, and yellow’s forsworn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And blue’s the colour that shall be worn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As to religion, politics, law, and war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But little need be said. All are required,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all are well enough. Of liberty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And slavery, and tyranny we hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Much; but the human mind affects extremes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart is in the middle of the system;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all affections gather round the truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The moderated joys and woes of life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love my God, my country, kind and kin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor would I see a dog wronged of his bone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My country! if a wretch should e’er arise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of thy countless sons, who would curtail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy freedom, dim thy glory⁠—while he lives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May an earth’s peoples curse him⁠—for of all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast thou secured the blessing;⁠—and if me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exist who would not arm for liberty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be he too cursed living, and when dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let him be buried downwards, with his face</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looking to Hell, and o’er his coward grave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hare skulk in her form.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, gently, friend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Curse nothing, not the Devil. He’s beside you⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For aught you know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I neither know nor care.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They pass some card-players.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Kings, queens, knaves, tens would trick the world away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And it were not, now and then, for some brave ace.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You see yon wretched starved old man; his brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grooved out with wrinkles, like the brown dry sand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tide of life is leaving?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, I see him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Last week he thought he was about to die;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So he bade gold be strewn beneath his pillow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gold on a chest that he might lie and see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gold put in a basin on his bed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he might dabble with his fingers in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He’s going now to grope for pence or pins.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He never gave a pin’s worth in his life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What would you do to him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I would have him wrought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into a living wire, which, beaten out,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might make a golden network for the world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then melt him inch by inch and hell by hell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where is the law of wrath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh, charity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is a thought the Devil might be proud of⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once and away. Misers and spendthrifts may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Torment each other in the world to come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Men look on death as lightning, always far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Off, or in Heaven. They know not it is in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Themselves, a strong and inward tendency,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul of every atom, every hair:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That nature’s infinite electric life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Escaping from each isolated frame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up out of earth, or down from Heaven, becomes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To each its proper death, and adds itself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus to the great reunion of the whole.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a man in mourning! What does he here?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He has just buried the only friend he had,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now comes hither to enjoy himself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why will we dedicate the dead to God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not ourselves, the living? Oft we speak,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With tears of joy and trust, of some dear friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As surely up in Heaven; while that same soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For aught we know, may be shuddering even in Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hear his name named; or there may be no</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Soul in the case⁠—and the fat icy worm,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give him a tongue, can tell us all about him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here is music. Stay. That simple melody</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes on the heart like infant innocence⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fore feeling pure; while yet the new-bodied soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is swinging to the motion of the heavens,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And scarce hath caught, as yet, earth’s backening course.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The heart is formed as earth was⁠—its</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Formless and void, and fit but for itself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then feelings half alive, just organized,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come next⁠—then creeping sports and purposes⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then animal desires, delights, and loves⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For love is the first and granite-like effect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of things⁠—the longest and the highest: next</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wild and winged desires, youth’s saurian schemes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which creep and fly by turns; which kill, and eat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And do disgorge each other: comes at length</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mould of perfect matchless manhood⁠—then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woman divides the heart, and multiplies it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The insipidity of innocence</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Palls: it is guilty, happy, and undone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A death is laid upon it, and it goes⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quits its green Eden for the sandy world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where it works out its nature, as it may,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In sweat, smiles, blood, tears, cursings, and what not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And giant sins possess it; and it worships</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Works of the hand, head, heart⁠—its own or others⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A creature worship, which excludeth God’s:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The less thrusts out the greater. Warning comes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the heart fears not⁠—feels not; till at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down comes the flood from Heaven; and that heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Broken inwards, earthlike, to its central hell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like the bright and burning eye we see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inly, when pressed hard backwards on the brain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ends and begins again⁠—destroyed, is saved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Every man is the first man to himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Eves are just as plentiful as apples;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor do we fall, nor are we saved by proxy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Eden we live in is our own heart;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the first thing we do, of our free choice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is sure and necessary to be sin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The only right me have is to be damned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is the good of music, or the beauty?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Music tells no truths.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! there is nought so sweet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As lying and listening music from the hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And singing from the lips, of one we love⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lips that all others should be turned to. Then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world would all be love and song; Heaven’s harps</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And orbs join in: the whole be harmony⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Distinct, yet blended⁠—blending all in one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long and delicious tremble like a chord.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But to Thee, God! all being is a harp,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon Thou makest mightiest melody.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast ever been in love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I never was.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis love which mostly destinates our life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What makes the world it after life I know not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For our horizon alters as we age:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Power only can make up for the lack of love⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Power of some sort. The mind at one time grows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So fast, it fails; and then its stretch is more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than its strength; but, as it opes, love fills it up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the stamen in the flower of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till for the time we well-nigh grow all love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And soon we feel the want of one kind heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love what’s well, and to forgive what’s ill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In us⁠—that heart we play for at all risks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How can the heart which lies embodied deep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In blood and bone, set like a ruby eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the breast, be made a toy for beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, vane-like, blown about by every wanton sigh?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How can the soul, the rich star-travelled stranger,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who here sojourneth only for a purchase,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Risk all the riches of his years of toil,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And his God-vouched inheritance of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For one light momentary taste of love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is so; and when once you know the sport⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The crowded pack of passions in full cry⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sweet deceits, the tempting obstacles⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The smile, the sigh, the tear, and the embrace⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All the delights of love at last in one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With kisses close as stars in the milky way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In at the death you cry, though ’twere your own!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Upon my soul, most sound morality!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing is thought of virtue, then, nor judgment?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! everything is thought of⁠—but not then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And⁠—judgment⁠—no! it is nowhere in the field.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Slow-paced and late arriving, still it comes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot understand this love; I hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of its idolatry, not its respect.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Respect is what we owe; love what we give.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And men would mostly rather give than pay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Morality’s the right rule for the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor could society cohere without</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Virtue; and there are those whose spirits walk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Abreast of angels and the future, here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Respect and love thou such.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Of course you wish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Women to love you rather than love them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is better. Now, you say you are a student.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things take study; what more than the face⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether year own, or hers you look and long at?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are many ways to one end: here is one:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You are good-looking; but that matters little:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It only pleases them. To please yourself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your face may be as ugly as the⁠—. Well, well;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But you must cultivate yourself: it will pay you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Study a dimple; work hard at a smile:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The things most delicate require most pains.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Practice the upward⁠—now the sidelong glance⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now the long passionful unwinking gaze,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which beats itself at last, and sees air only.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be restless, and distress yourself for her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take up her hand⁠—press it, and pore on it⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let it drop⁠—snatch it again as though you had</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let slip so much of honor or of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swear⁠—vow by all means⁠—never miss an oath:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If broken, why it only spoils itself;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is a broken oath and not an whole one.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Frown⁠—toss about⁠—let her lips be for a time:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But steal a kiss at last like fire from Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weep if you can, and call the tears heat-drops.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Droop your head⁠—sigh deep⁠—play the fool, in short,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hour, and she will play the fool for ever.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind! it is folly to tell women truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They would rather live on lies so they be sweet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never be long in one mind to one love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You change your practice with your subject. All</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Differ. But yet, who knows one woman well</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By heart, knows all. It is my experience;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I advise on good authority.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So thank me for my lecture on delusion.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Time laughs at love. It is a hateful sight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That bald old grey-beard jeering the boy, Love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But as to women: that game has two sides.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Passion is om affection; and there is nought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So maddening and so lowering as to have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worse in passion. Think, when one by one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pride, love, and jealousy, and fifty more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great feelings column up to force a heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all are beaten back⁠—all fail⁠—all fail:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tower intact: but risk it: we must learn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To know the world, be wise and be a fool.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart will have its swing⁠—the world its way:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who seeks to stop them, only throws himself down.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We must take as we find: go as they go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or stand aside. Let the world have the wall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How do you think, pray, to get through the world?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I mean not to get through the world at all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But over it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aspiring! You will find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world is all up-hill when we would do;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All down-hill when we suffer. Nay, it will part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the Red Sea, so that the poor may pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We make our compliments to wretchedness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hope the poor want nothing, and are well.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I mean, what profession will you choose?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely you will do something for a name.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Names are of much more consequence than things.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well; here’s our honest, all-exhorting friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The parson⁠—here the doctor. I am sure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Devil might act as moderator there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And do mankind some service.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In his way.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But I care neither for men’s souls nor bodies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say you to the law? are you ambitious?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor do I mind for other people’s business.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have no heart for their predicaments:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am for myself. I measure ever thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By, what is it to me? from which I find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have but little in common with the mass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Except my meals and so forth; dress and sleep.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have that within me I can live upon:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spider-like, spin my place out anywhere.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To none of all die arts and sciences⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Astronomy nor entomology,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor gunnery, for instance, then you feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Attracted heartily and mentally?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why no; there are so many rise and fall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One knows not which to choose. As for the stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I never look on them without dismay.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth has outrun them in our modern mind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By worlds of odds. Enough for us, it seems,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And our cold calculators to jot down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their revolutions, distances, and squares;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the bright laws which stars and spirits rule,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are all laid out and buried grave on grave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fourfold worlds and elemental spheres,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which in concentric circles, like the ring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That the magician stands in, from on high</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give spiritual calling to our earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lord it over her, yet in such wise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That still by them we may conjoin our souls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto the starry spirits of all worlds;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond the changed mansions of the moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond the burning heart of heaven, where dwell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The governors of nature and the blest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All knowing spirits and celestial,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And divine demons; are all gone⁠—extinct.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no danger now of knowing aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which ought not to be known. No more of that!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And you, ye planetary sons of light!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From him who hovereth, moth-like, round the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To six-mooned Uranus, Light’s loftiest round.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tour aspects, dignities, ascendancies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tour partile quartiles, and your plastic trines,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all your Heavenly houses and effects,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall meet no more devout expounders here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You too, ye juried signs, earth’s sunny path</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon her wheeling orbit, all farewell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your exaltations and triplicities,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fiery, airy, and the rest; your falls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And detriments, and governments, and gifts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are all abolished. Henceforth ye shall shine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In vain to man. Diurnal, cardinal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nocturnal, equinoctial, hot or dry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earthy, or moist, or feminine, or fixed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Luxurious, violent, bicorporate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Masculine, barren, and commanding, cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fruitful or watery, or what not, now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It matters nothing. The joy of Jupiter,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The exaltation of the Dragon’s head,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun’s triplicity and glorious</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Day house on high, the moon’s dim detriment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all the starry inclusions of all signs⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall rise, and rule, and pass, and no one know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That there are spirit-rulers of all worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which fraternise with earth, and, though unknown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hold in the shining voices of the stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Communion on high, ever and everywhere.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mystic charm of numbers, and the sole</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oneness which is in all, of nature’s great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triadic principle, in all things, seen;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In man thus, as composed of thrice three forms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Intrinsic; first, corporeally, blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Body, and bones; next, intellectively,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imagination, judgment, memory;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thirdly, spiritually, mind and soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And spirit, which unites with God the whole</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Being, and comes from and returns to Him⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Allures no more man’s mind debased. Thus, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of alchemy; the golden starry stone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Invisible, the principle of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The quintessence of all the elements,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is still unbought;⁠—still flows the stream of pearl</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath the magic mountain; still the scent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As of a thousand amaranthine wreaths, which lures</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All life unto its sweetness, floats around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mistlike, the shining bath where Luna laves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or Sol, bright brother of that mooned maid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triumphs in light;⁠—the spiritual sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Heavenly Earth smaragdine, and the fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit of life, the live land still exist,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortally, internally unseen.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still breathes the Paradisal air around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The universal whole; the watery fire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destructive, yet impalpable to sense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The initial and conclusion of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, the beginning and the end of Death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The secret which is shared ’tween God and man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And which is nature only, wholly, still</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heavenly gloom incomprehensible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wait the Deific will; yea, still the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereto all elements contribute, burns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>About us and within us, world and soul;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The primal sperm and matter of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose centre is the limit of all things⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The snowy gold, the star and spirit seed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is to render rich and deathless all⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The self-begot, self-wedded, and self-born,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which the wind carries in its womb, all have,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And few receive; the spirit of the earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The water of immortal life still lives:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The universal solvent of disease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still bounds through nature’s veins; and still, in fine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The secrets only to be told by fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Starry or beamless, central and extreme,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Burn to be born. And other natures may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Use them, and do. In Demogorgon’s hall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still sits the universal mystery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throned in itself and ministered unto</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By its own members:⁠—Man, alas! alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The recreant spirit of the universe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Contemns the operations of the light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loves surface-knowledge; calls the crimes of crowds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Virtue: adores the useful vices; licks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gory dust from off the feet of war,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And swears it food for gods, though fit for fiends</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only:⁠—reversing just the Devil’s state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When first he entered on this orb of man’s⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A fallen angel’s form, a reptile’s soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! this is libellous to man and fiend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And brute together.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All are art and part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the same mystic treason. But enough;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The most material, immaterial</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Departments of pure wisdom are despised.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For well we know that, properly prepared,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Souls self-adapted knowledge to receive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are by the truth desired, illumined; man’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit, extolled, dilated, clarified,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By holy meditation and divine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lore, fits him to convene with purer powers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which do unseen surround us aye and gladden</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In human good and exaltation; thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The face of Heaven is not more clear to one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than to another outwardly; but one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By strong intention of his soul perceives,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Attracts, unites himself to essences</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And elemental spirits of wider range</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And more beneficent nature, by whose aid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Occasion, circumstance, futurity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impress on him their image, and impart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their secrets to his soul; thus chance and lot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are sacred things; thus dreams are verities.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But oh! alas for all earth’s loftier lore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And spiritual sympathy of worlds!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There shall be no more magic nor cabala,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor Rosicrucian nor Alchymic lore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor fairy fantasies; no more hobgoblins,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor ghosts, nor imps, nor demons. Conjurors.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enchanters, witches, wizards, shall all die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hopeless and heirless; their divining arts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Supernal or infernal⁠—dead with them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so ’twill doubtless be with other things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In time; therefore I will commit my brain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To none of them.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Perchance ’twere wiser not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man’s heart hath not half uttered itself yet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And much remains to do as well as say.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart is some time ere it finds its focus.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when it does, with the whole light of nature</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strained through it to a hair’s breadth, it but burns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The things beneath it, which it lights to death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well, farewell, Mr. Student. May you never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Regret those hours which make the mind, if they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unmake the body; for the sooner we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are fit to be all mind, the better. Blest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is he whose heart is the home of the great dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And their great thoughts. Who can mistake great thoughts?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They seize upon the mind⁠—arrest, and search,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shake it⁠—bow the tall soul as by wind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rush over it like rivers over reeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which quaver in the current⁠—turn us cold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pale, and voiceless; leaving in the brain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A rocking and a ringing⁠—glorious,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But momentary, madness might it last,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And close the soul with Heaven as with a seal!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In lieu of all these things whose loss thou mournest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If earnestly or not I know not, use</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The great and good and true which ever live,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And are all common to pure eyes and true.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon the summit of each mountain-thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worship thou God; for Deity is seen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From every elevation of the soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Study the Light; attempt the high; seek out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The soul’s bright path; and since the soul is fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of heat intelligential, turn it aye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the all-Fatherly source of light and life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Piety purifies the soul to see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perpetual apparitions of all grace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And power, which to the sight of those who dwell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In ignorant sin are never known. Obey</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy genius, for a minister it is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto the throne of Fate. Draw to thy soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And centralise the rays which are around</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the Divinity. Keep thy spirit pure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From worldly taint by the repellant strength</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of virtue. Think on noble thoughts and deeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ever. Count o’er the rosary of truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And practice precepts which are proven wise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It matters not then what thou fearest. Walk</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Boldly and wisely in that light thou hast;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a hand above will help thee on.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am an omnist, and believe in all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Religions⁠—fragments of one golden world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet to be relit in its place in Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all are relatively true and false,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As evidence and earnest of the heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To those who practice, or have faith in them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The absolutely true religion is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In Heaven only, yea in Deity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But foremost of all studies, let me not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forget to bid thee learn Christ’s faith by heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Study its truths, and practice its behests:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are the purest, sweetest, peacefullest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all immortal reasons or records:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They will be with thee when all else have gone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind, body, passion, all wear out⁠—not faith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor truth. Keep thy heart cool, or rule its heat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fixed ends: waste it not upon itself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not all the agony of all the damned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fused in one pang, vies with that earthquake throb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which wakens it from waste to let us see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world rolled by for aye; and that we must</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wait an eternity for our next chance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether it be in Heaven or elsewhere.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sir,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will remember this most grave advice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And think of you with all respect.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, mind!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worst men often give the best advice.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our deeds are sometimes better than our thoughts.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Commend me, friend, to every one you meet:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am an universal favourite.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Old men admire me deeply for my beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Young women for my genius and strict virtue,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And young men for my modesty and wisdom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All turn to me, whenever I speak, full-faced,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As planets to the sun, or owls to a rushlight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farewell!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Student</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I hope to meet again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yonder’s a woman singing. Let us hear her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ballad-Singer</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>In the gray church tower</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Were the clear bells ringing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When a maiden sat in her lonely bower</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Sadly and lowly singing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus she sang, that maiden fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the soft blue eyes and the long light hair:</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>This hand hath oft been held by one</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Who now is far away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here I sit and sigh alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Through all the weary day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, when will he I love return!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, when shall I forget to mourn!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Along the dark and dizzy path</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Ambition madly runs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis there they say his course he hath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And therefore love he shuns.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, fame and honour bind his brow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For so he would be with me now!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>In the gray church tower</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Were the dear bells ringing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When a bounding step in that lonely bower</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Broke on the maiden singing;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She turned, she saw; oh, happy fair!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For her love who loved her so well was there!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And we might trust these youths and maidens fair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world was made for nothing bat love, love!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now I think it was made but to be burned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And if I love not now, while woman is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All bosom to the young, when shall I love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who ever paused on passion’s fiery wheel?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or trembling by the side of her he loved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose lightest touch brings all but madness, ever</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stopped coldly short to reckon up his pulse?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The car comes⁠—and we lie⁠—and let it come;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It crushes⁠—kills⁠—what then! It is joy to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough shall not fool me. I fling the foil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Away. Let me but look on aught which casts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadow of a pleasure, and here I bare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A breast which would embrace a bride of fire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pleasure⁠—we part not! No! It were easier</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wring God’s lightnings from the grasp of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must be mad; but so is all the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Folly. It matters not. What is the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me? Nought. I am all things to myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If my heart thundered, would the world rock? Well⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then let the mad world fight its shadow down;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There soon will be nor sun, nor world, nor shadow.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, my blood, my bright red running soul⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoice thou, like a river in thy rapids!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoice⁠—thou wilt never pale with age, nor thin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in thy full dark beauty, vein by vein,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fold by fold, serpent-like, encircling me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a stag, sunstruck, top thy bounds and die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Throb, bubble, sparkle, laugh and leap along!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make merry while the holidays shall last.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heart! I could tear thee out, thou fool! thou fool!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And strip thee into shreds upon the wind:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What have I done that thou shouldst serve me thus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let us away. We have had enough of this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The night is glooming on us. It is the hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When lovers will speak lowly, for the sake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of being nigh each other; and when love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shoots up the eye like morning on the east,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making amends for the long northern night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They passed ere either knew the other loved.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the hour of hearts, when all hearts feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As they could love to mad death, finding aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give back fire; for love, like nature, is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>War⁠—sweet war! Arms! To arms! so they be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woman! Old people may say what they please⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heart of age is like an emptied wine-cup,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its life lies in a heel-tap⁠—how can they judge?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twere a waste of time to ask how they wasted theirs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But while the blood is bright, breath sweet, skin smooth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And limbs all made to minister delight⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere yet we have shed our locks like trees their leaves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we stand staring bare into the air⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is a fool who is not for love and beauty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I speak unto the young, for I am of them,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And alway shall be. What are years to me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Traitors! that vice-like fang the hand ye lick:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye fall like small birds beaten by a storm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against a dead wall, dead. I pity ye.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! that such mean things should raise hope or fear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those Titans of the heart, that fight at Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sleep by fits on fire; whose slightest stir’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An earthquake. I am bound and blest to youth!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! give me to the young⁠—the fair⁠—the free⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The brave, who would breast a rushing burning world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which came between them and their hearts’ delight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None but the brave and beautiful can love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, for the young heart like a fountain playing!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flinging its bright fresh feelings up to the skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It loves and strives to reach⁠—strives, loves in vain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is of earth, and never meant for Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us love both, and die. The sphinx-like heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Consistent in its inconsistency,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loathes life the moment that life’s riddle is read:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The knot of our existence is untied,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we lie loose and useless. Life is had;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then we sigh, and say, can this be all?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not what we thought⁠—it is very well⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But we want something more⁠—there is but death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when we have said, and seen, and done, and had,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enjoyed and suffered, all we have wished and feared⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From fame to ruin, and from love to loathing⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There can come but one more change⁠—try it⁠—death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! it is great to feel we care for nothing⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That hope, nor love, nor fear, nor aught of earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can check the royal lavishment of life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But like a streamer strown upon the wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We fling our souls to fate and to the future.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to die young is youth’s divinest gift⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To pass from one world fresh into another,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere change hath lost the charm of soft regret,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And feel the immortal impulse from within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which makes the coming, life⁠—cry, alway, on!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And follow it while strong⁠—is Heaven’s last mercy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a fire-fly in the southern clime</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which shineth only when upon the wing;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So is it with the mind: when once we rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We darken. On! said God unto the soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As to the earth, for ever. On it goes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A rejoicing native of the infinite⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As a bird of air⁠—an orb of heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
