<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-32" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—The Millennial Earth.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels</b> conversing; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Earth is all one Eden. Pity, sure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That it should ever end.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say not so;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Although I have a thousand plans in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some interwoven with the farthest stars⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each one of which might ask a year of years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To perfect.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True; our Maker knoweth best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What thought or deed may best belong to time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or to eternity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All prophecy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath said the earth shall cease, and that right soon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis like enough. Beauty’s akin to Death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold, our sister Graces of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Faith, Hope, and Love, descend! Methinks of late</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye chiefly dwell on earth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Love</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where lives and reigns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Son of God, there are we ever seen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Successive, as the seasons to the sun.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saints</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well are ye known and welcome in all worlds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherever lofty thought or godly deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is lodged or compassed, there your blessings rest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hope</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How sweet, how sacred now, this earth of man’s!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The prelude of a yet sublimer bliss!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I marked it from the first, while yet it lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lightless and stirless; ere the forming fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was kindled in its bosom, or the land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lift its Volcanic breastwork up from sea.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deluge and idolatries of men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I viewed, though shuddering, and with faltering eye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en to the incarnation of Heaven’s Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dawning of His faith; that faith which was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An infant and anon a giant; was</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A star, and grew a Heaven-fulfilling sun;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was an outcast, and became, ere long,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dweller in all palaces; which hid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its head in dens of deserts, and sat throned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>After, in richest temples high as hills;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which was poured out in mortal blood, and rose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Li an immortal spirit; as a slave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was sold for gold and prostrated to power;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now that lowly bondmaid is a Queen;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lo! she is beloved in earth and Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lieth in the bosom of her Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Bride of the all-worshipped, one with God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Love</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We even of divinest origin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In infinite progression view all worlds;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we are happy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Faith</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The dead sleep as yet;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But their time cometh, and the bonds of death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Already slacken round the living soul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mortal sleep of ages, which began</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Time sank down into his slumberous west,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thins even now o’er the reviving eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gathering their Heaven-lent light, no more to wane</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In woe or age; never be quenched in tears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a star in the sea. ’Tis as I ever knew;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My life is to receive and to believe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Word and words of God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Love</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I, who am Love</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Grace and Charity, rejoice with you;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither ye wend I with ye; whether here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or on the utmost rim of Light’s broad reign⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The least and last of stars which even seems</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tremble at its insignificance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In presence of Infinity; where yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No angel’s wing hath waved, nor foot of fiend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Left its hot imprint;⁠—still, in all do we</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find fit delight and honour, as now here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now earth and Heaven hold commune, day and night;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s not a wind but bears upon its wing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The messages of God; and not a star</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But knows the bliss of earth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The earth hath God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remade, and all its elements refined,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fit for sublimer Being. Flesh hath passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its fiery baptism, and come forth clear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As crystal gold: all that of vile or mean</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pertained to it hath perished atomless.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth, like a diamond, basks in her own free light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unfed, unaided, unrequiring aught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All now is purity and power and peace.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The first-born of creation, they who hail</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Archangels as their brethren, mountainlike</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reign o’er the plains of men, converting all;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reaping the fields of immortality,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each one his sheaf, for Him the Harvest-Lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom belongs earth’s whole estate and life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And every world’s.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And He shall gamer all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The awful tribes which have in Hades dwelt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past count of time, await their rising. God’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great day, the sabbath of the world’s long week,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is at high noon; and Christ hath yet to come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To judge and save the living and the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The shadows of Eternity o’ercast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Already Time’s bright towers. The Heavens shall come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Down like a cloud upon a hill, and sweep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their spirit over earth, and the whole face</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And form of things shall be dissolved and change.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nothing shall be but essence, perfect, pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And void of every attribute but God’s.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This even is too gross for that which is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To come. The holy have both earth and Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor pain, nor toil of mind or frame, nor doubt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor discontent, nor enmity to God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Disturb the steady joy the spirit feels;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor element can torture, nor time tire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor sea nor mountain make or bar or fear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sickness and woe and death are things gone by;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destroyed with the destruction of the world:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shadows of things which have been, never more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To waste the world’s bright hours, nor grate the heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mighty man; now fit for thrones and wings;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ruler of worlds, main minister of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inheritor of all the prophecies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of God fore-uttered through the tongues of Time,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ages of ages. Evil is no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And does earth satisfy thee now?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is a brighter, loftier life for man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even yet, the very union with God.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God works by means. Between the two extremes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of earth and Heaven there lies a mediate state⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A pause between the lightning lapse of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And following thunders of eternity;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Between eternity and time a lapse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To soul unconscious, though agelasting, where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit is tempered to its final fate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When every interfulgeht conscious state</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within or between worlds, repose or bliss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Divested, man shall, mix with Deity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the Eternal and Immortal make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One Being. As in earth’s first paradise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God’s Spirit walked with man, and commune made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With him, so in the second, after death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man’s spirit walks with God in an elect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Existence, and a vigil of the great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The holy day which is to break in Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thither the Lord of Life went, in the hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That Hell by Earth revenged itself on Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With one soul penitent accompanied;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor long remained He there, yet long enough</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To cheer earth’s faithful, who received Him then</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tn silent unknown blessedness of soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With time-outwearing hope that yet in Him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They should partake the Godhood of His love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with Him rose then, in prophetic proof</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of His Divinity, many a deathless ghost,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triumphant o’er that blind revenge which wrought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell! thy destruction⁠—thy salvation, Earth!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That such will be, the just well know; and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth’s great events and changes tend thereto;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its fiery dissolution in the past,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And supernatural recommencement now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under the universal creed of Christ.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The chosen and the world-redeemed partake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His personal and spiritual reign.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And this shall last, till, like the setting sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deserting earth, He shall retire to Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all His captive victors in His train,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triumphant, and translated evermore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into the hierarchal skies. Wilt see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While yet time is, earth’s shadowy world within⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The inward living death she bears about</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her heart, hath ever borne⁠—and, augur-like,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Explore the ominous bowels of the earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me are given the secrets of the centre,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The keys of earth, to lock and to unlock,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Coffer-like. I, it was who seized and bound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At His behest who wills and it is done⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even on their thrones, the mighty thou wilt see.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Angel of Heaven! I would view these things.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nor these alone, but other wonders yet.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The valley where Death’s dark wings brooded o’er,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A God-offending night, unvisited</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By sun or star, where but the fatuous fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of man’s weak judgment wandered, till God’s Son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laid o’er the black abyss a bridge of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And married earth to the mainland of Heaven:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This shalt thou see, Death’s grave; and over him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And over it, that monument of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enlightening earth. The gods and fiends of old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all the fictions of the heart of man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imagined of the future past for aye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt inspect. Behold this mountain! We</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must pass through it; for under lie the gates</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the invisible regions whereunto</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We tend, for a brief season.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>On then!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy marble breast, O mountain, to its depths!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An angel and a man divine demand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A way through these foundations.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And the rocks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Open like mists before thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archangel</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Follow me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
