<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-21" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Garden and bower by the sea.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Night comes, world-jewelled, as my bride should be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars rush forth in myriads as to wage</span>
								<br/>
								<span>War with the lines of Darkness; and the moon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pale ghost of Night, comes haunting the cold earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>After the sun’s red sea-death⁠—quietless.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal Night! I love thee. Thou and I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are of one seed⁠—the eldest blood of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He makes; we mar together all things⁠—all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But our own selves. Love makes thee cold and tremble,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And me all fire. Do off that starry robe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Catch me up to thee. Let us love, and die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And weld our souls together, Night! But here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cometh mine earthly. My Elissa! welcome.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is’t not a lovely, nay, a heavenly eve?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy presence only makes it so to me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The moments thou art with me are like stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Peering through my dark life.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, speak not so,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or I shall weep, and thou wilt turn away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From woman’s tears: yet are they woman’s wealth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then keep thy treasures, lady! I would not have</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world, if prized at one sad tear of thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One tear of beauty can outweigh a world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even of sin and sorrow, heavy as this;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But beauty cannot sin and should not weep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For she is mortal. Oh! let deathless things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone weep. Why should aught that dies be sad?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The noble mind is oft too generous,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, by protecting, weakens lesser ones;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tears must come of feeling though they quench</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As oft the light which love lit in the eye.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thy love ever hangs about my heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like the pure pearl-wreath which enrings thy brow.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I meant not to be mournful. Tel me, now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How thou hast passed the hours since last we met?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I have, stayed the livelong day within this bower;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It was here that thou did promise me to come⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Watching from wanton morn to repentant eve,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The self-same roses ope and close; untired,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Listening the same hirds’ first and latest songs⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And still thou camest not. To the mind which waits</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon one hour the others are but slaves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The week hath but one day⁠—the day one hour⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That hour of the heart⁠—that lord of time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sweet one! I raced with light and passed the laggard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To meet thee⁠—or, I mean I could have done⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, have outsped the very dart of Death⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Se much I sought; and were I living light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From God, with leave to range the world, and choose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another brow than His whereon to beam⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To mark what even an angel could but covet⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A something lovelier than Heaven’s loveliness⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To thee I straight would dart unheeding all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lives of other worlds, even those who name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Themselves thy kind; for oft my mind o’ersoars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The stars; and pondering upon what may be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of their chief lording natures, man’s seems worst⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The darkest, meanest, which, through all these worlds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drags what is deathless, may be, down to dust.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak not so bitterly of human kind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know that thou dost love it. Hast not heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of those great spirits, who, the greater grow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The better we are able them to prize?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Great minds can never cease; yet have they not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A separate estate of deathlessness:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The future is a remnant of their life:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our time is part of theirs, not theirs of ours:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They know the thoughts of ages long before.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is not the weak mind feels the great mind’s might;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None but the great can test it. Does the oak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or reed feel the strong storm most? Oh! unsay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What thou hast said of man; nor deem me wrong.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind cannot mind despise⁠—it is itself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind must love mind: the great and good are friends;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he is but half great who is not good.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, oh! humanity is the fairest flower</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blooming in earthly breasts; so sweet and pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That it might freshen even the fadeless wreaths</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Twined round the golden harps of those in Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For thy sake I will love even man, or aught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirit were I, and a mere mortal thou,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thy sake I would even seek to die;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That, dead, or living, I might still be with thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But no! I’ll deem thee deathless⁠—mind and make,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worthier of some spirit’s love than mine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, of the first-born of God’s sons, could he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In that sweet shade thy beauty casts o’er all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One moment lay and cool his burning soul;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or might the ark of his wide flood-like woe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But rest upon that mount of peace and bliss⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy heart inbosomed in all beauteousness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, lady! shrink not. Thinkest thou I am he?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art too noble, far. I oft have wished,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere I knew thee, I had some spirit’s love;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But thou art more like what I sought than man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And a forbidden quest, it seems; for thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast more of awe than love about thee, like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mystery of dreams which we can feel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But cannot touch.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, think not so! It is wrong.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, let us sit in this thy favourite bower,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I win hear thee sing. I love that voice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dipping more softly on the subject ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than that calm kiss the willow gives the wave⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A soft rich tone, a rainbow of sweet sounds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just spanning the soothed sense. Come, nay me not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Do thou lead out some lay; I’ll follow thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, I agree. It will spare me much of shame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In coming after thee. My song is said</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Lucifer the star. See there he shines! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>I am Lucifer, the star:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh! think on me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I lighten from afar</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The Heavens and thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In town, or tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or this fair bower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh! think on me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though a wandering star,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the loveliest are,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I love but thee.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Lady! When I brightest beam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Love! look on me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not what I may seem</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">To the world or thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But fain would love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With thee above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Where thou wilt be.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if love be a dream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the world doth deem,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">What is’t to me?</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Could we but deem the stars had hearts, and loved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They would seem happier, holier, even than now;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ah! why not? they are so beautiful;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And love is part and union in itself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all that is in nature brilliant, pure⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all in feeling sacred and sublime.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely the stars are images of love:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sunbeam and the starbeam doth bring love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sky, the sea, the rainbow, and the stream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dark blue hill, where all the loveliness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of earth and Heaven, in sweet extatic strife,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seem mingling hues which might immortal be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If length of life by height of beauty went:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All seem but made for love⁠—love made for all:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We do become all heart with those we love:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is nature’s self⁠—it is everywhere⁠—it is here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To me there is but one place in the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that where thou art; for where’er I be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy love doth seek its way into my heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As will a bird into her secret nest:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then sit and sing; sweet wing of beauty, sing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bright one! who dwellest in the happy skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rejoicing in thy light as does the brave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In his keen flashing sword, and his strong arm’s</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swift swoop, canst thou, from among the sons of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Single out those who love thee as do I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee from thy fellow glories? If so, star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turn hither thy bright front; I love thee, friend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast no deeds of darkness. All thou dost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is to us light and beauty: yea, thou art</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A globe all glory; thou who at the first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Didst answer to the angels which in Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sang the bright birth of earth, and even now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As star by tar is born, dost sing the same</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With countless hosts in infinite delight,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be unto me a moment! Write thy bright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Light on my heart before the sun shall rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vanquish sight. Thou art the prophecy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of light which He fulfils. Speak, shining star,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drop from thy golden lips the truths of Heaven;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First of all stars and favourite of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Apostle of the sun⁠—thou upon whom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His mantle resteth⁠—speak, prophetic beauty!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speak, shining star out of the heights of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beautiful being, speak to God for man!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it because of beauty thou wast chosen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be the sign of sin? For surely sin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must be surpassing lovely when for her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men forfeit God’s reward of deathless bliss</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And life divine; or, is it that such beauty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sometimes, before the truth, and sometimes after,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is a moral or a prophecy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is ever warning? Why wast thou accorded</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the great Evil? Is it because thou art</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all the sun’s bright servants nearest earth?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shall we then forget that Christ hath said</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is thyself, the light-bringer of Heaven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Star of the morning! unto us thou art</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The presage of a day of power. Like thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us rejoice in life, then, and proclaim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A glory coming greater than our own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All ages are but stars to that which comes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sunlike. Oh! speak, star! Lift thou up thy voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of yon radiant ranks, and I on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As thou in Heaven, will bless the Lord God ever.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear, Lucifer, thou star! I answer thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></span>
							</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Oh! ask me not to look and love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">But bid me worship thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou art earthly things above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">As far as angels be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then whether in the eve or morn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost the maiden skies adorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh! let me worship thee!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I am but as this drop of dew;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh! let me worship thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy light, thy strength, is ever new,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Even as the angels’ be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as this dew-drop, till it dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bosoms the golden stars and skies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Oh! let me worship thee!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
							<p>
								<span>But, dearest, why that dark look?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let it not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cloud thine even with its shadow: but the ground</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all great thoughts is sadness; and I mused</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon past happiness. Well⁠—be it past!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did Lucifer, as I do, gaze on thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flame of woe would flicker in his breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight die out⁠—the brightness of thy beauty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quenching it as the sun doth earthly fire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, look not on me so intensely sad.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forgive me: it was an agony of bliss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I love thee, and am full of happiness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My bosom bounds beneath thy smile as doth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sea’s unto the moon, his mighty mistress;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lying and looking up to her, and saying⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lovely! lovely! lovely! lady of the Heavens!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! when the thoughts of other joyous days⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perchance, if such may be, of happier times⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are falling gently on the memory</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like autumn leaves distained with dusky gold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet softly as a snowflake; and the smile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of kindliness, like thine, is beaming on me⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! pardon, if I lose myself, nor know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether I be with Heaven or thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Use not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such ardent phrase, nor mix the claim of aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On earth with thoughts more than with hopes of Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hopes, lady! I have none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou must have. All</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have hopes, however wretched they may be,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or blest. It is hope which lifts the lark so high⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hope of a lighter air and bluer sky:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the poor hack which drops down on the flints⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon whose eye the dust is settling⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He hopes to die. No being is which hath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not love and hope.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes⁠—one! The ancient Ill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dwelling and damned through all which is; that spirit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose heart is hate⁠—who is the foe of God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The foe of all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How knowest thou such doth live?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love is the happy privilege of mind⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love is the reason of all living things.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A Trinity there seems of principles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which represent and rule created life⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love of self, our fellows, and our God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all throughout one common feeling reigns:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each doth maintain and is maintained by the other;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All are compatible⁠—all needful; one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To life⁠—to virtue one⁠—and one to bliss;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which thus together make the power, the end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the perfection of created Being.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From these three principles doth every deed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Desire, and will, and reasoning, good or bad, come;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To these they all determine⁠—sum and scheme:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The three are one in centre and in round;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wrapping the world of life as do the skies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our world. Hail! air of love by which we live!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How sweet, how fragrant! Spirit, though unseen⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Void of gross sign⁠—is scarce a simple essence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Immortal, immaterial, though it be.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One only simple essence liveth⁠—God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creator, uncreate. The brutes beneath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The angels high above us, with ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are but compounded things of mind and form.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all things animate is therefore cored</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An elemental sameness of existence;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For God, being Love, in love created all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As He contains the whole, and penetrates.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seraphs love God, and angels love the good:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We love each other; and these lower lives,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which walk the earth in thousand diverse shapes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to their reason, love us too:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The most intelligent affect us most.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, man’s chief wisdom’s love⁠—the love of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The new religion⁠—final perfect, pure⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was that of Christ and love. His great command⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His all-sufficing precept⁠—was’t not love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Truly to love ourselves we must love God⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love God we must all His creatures love⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To love His creatures, both ourselves and Him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus love is all that’s wise, fair, good, and happy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How knowest thou God doth live? Why did He not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With that creating hand which sprinkled stars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On space’s bosom, bidding her breathe and wake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From the long death-like trance in which she lay⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With that same hand which scattered o’er the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As this small dust I strew upon the wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon countless orbs, aye fixing each on Him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its flaming eye, which winks and blenches oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath His glance⁠—with the finger of that hand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which spangled o’er infinity with suns,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wrapped it round about Him as a robe⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why did He not write out his own great name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In spheres of fire, that Heaven might alway tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To every creature, God? If not, then why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should I believe when I behold around me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nought scarce, save ill and woe?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God surely lives!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without God all things are in tunnel darkness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let there be God, and all are sun⁠—all God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to the just soul, in a future state,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Defect’s dark mist, thick-spreading o’er this vale,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall dim the eye no more, nor bound survey;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And evil, now which boweth being down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As dew the grass, shall only fit all life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fresher growth and for intenser day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where God shall dry all tears as the sun dew.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! lady, I am wretched.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say not so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With thee I could not deem myself unhappy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hark to the sea! It sounds like the near hum</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of a great city.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, the city earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For such these orbs are in the realms of space.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I dreamed once that the night came down to me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In figure, oh! too like thine own for truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And looked into me with his thousand eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that made me unhappy; but it passed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I half wished it back. Mind hath its earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Heaven. The many petty common thoughts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On which we daily tread, as it were, make one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And above which few look; the other is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That high and welkin-like infinity⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The brighter, upper half of the mind’s world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thick with great sun-like and constellate thoughts;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in the night of mind, which is our sleep,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These thoughts shine out in dreams. Dreams double life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They are the heart’s bright shadow on life’s flood;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And even the step from death to deathlessness⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From this earth’s gross existence unto Heaven⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can scarce be more than from the harsh hot day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sleep’s soft scenes, the moonlight of the mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wave is never weary of the wind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in mountainous playfulness leaps to it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Always; but mind gets weary of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And glooms itself in sleep, like a sweet smile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Line by line, settling into proper sadness;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For sleep seems part of our immortality:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And why should any thing that dies be sad?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Last night I dreamed I walked within a hall⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The inside of the world. Long shroud-like lights</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lit up its lift-like dome and pale wide walls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Horizon-like; and every one was there:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It was the house of Death, and Death was there.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We could not see him, but he was a feeling:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We knew he was around us⁠—heard us⁠—eyed us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But where wast thou? I never met thee once.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all was still as nothing; or as God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep judging, when the thought of making first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quickened and stirred within Him; and He made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All Heaven at one thought as at a glance.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Noise was there none; and yet there was a sound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which seemed to be half like silence, half like sound.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All crept about still as the cold wet worms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which slid among our feet, we could not scape from.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound me were ruined fragments of dead gods⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those shadows of the mystery of One⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the red worms, too, flourished over these,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For marble is a shadow weighed with mind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each being, as men of old believed, distinct</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In form, and place, and power. But Oh! not all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gathered gods of Eld could shine like ours,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No more than all yon stars could make a sun.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But truly then men lived in moral night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Neath a dim starlight of religious truth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I felt my spirit’s spring gush out more clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gazing on these: they beautified my mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As rocks and flowers reflected do a well.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mind makes itself like that it lives amidst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And on; and thus, among dreams, imaginings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And scenes of awe, and purity, and power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grows sternly sweet and calm⁠—all beautiful</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With god-like coldness and unconsciousness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mortal passion, mental toil; until,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like to the marble model of a god,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It doth assume a firm and dazzling form,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scarcely less incorruptible than that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It emblems: and so grew, methought, my mind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Matter hath many qualities; mind, one:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is irresistible: pure power⁠—pure god.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While wandering on I met what seemed myself:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was it not strange that we should meet, and there?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But all is strange in dreaming, as in death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And waking, as in life: nought is not strange.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methought that I was happy, because dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All hurried to and fro; and many cried</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To each other⁠—Can I do thee any good?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But no one heeded: nothing could avail:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world was one great grave. I looked, and saw</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time on his two great wings⁠—one, night⁠—one, day⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fly, moth-like, right into the flickering sun;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that the sun went out, and they both perished.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And one gat up and spake⁠—a holy man⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exhorting them; but each and all cried out⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go to!⁠—it helps not⁠—means not: we are dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death spake no word methought, but me he made</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speak for him; and I dreamed that I was Death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then, that Death only lived: all things were mixed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Up and down shooting, like the brain’s fierce dance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a delirium, when we are apt to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell is my heir; what kin to me is Heaven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring out your hearts before me. Give your limbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom ye list or love. My son, Decay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will take them: give them him. I want your hearts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I may take them up to God. There came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These words among us, but we knew not whence;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It was as if the air spake. And there rose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of the earth a giant thing, all earth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His eye was earthy, and his arm was earthy:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He had no heart. He but said, I am Decay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as he spake, he crumbled into earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the was nothing of him. But we all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lifted our faces up at the word, God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And spied a dark star high above in the midst</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of others, numberless as are the dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all plucked out their hearts, and held them in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their right hands. Many tried to pick out specks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stains, but could not: each gave up his heart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And something⁠—all things⁠—nothing⁠—it was Death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Said, as before, from air⁠—Let us to God!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And straight we rose, leaving behind the raw</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worms and dead gods, all of us⁠—soared and soared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Right upwards, till the star I told thee of</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Looked like a moon⁠—the moon became a sun:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sun⁠—there came a hand between the sun and us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And its five fingers made five nights in air.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God tore the glory from the sun’s broad brow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And flung the flaming scalp off flat to Hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I saw Him do it; and it passed close by us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then I heard a long, cold, skeleton scream,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a trumpet whining through a catacomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which made the sides of that great grave shake in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I saw the world and vision of the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dim itself off⁠—and all was life! I woke,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And felt the high sun blazoning on my brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His own almighty mockery of woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fierce and infinite laugh at things which cease.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hell hath its light⁠—and Heaven; he burns with both.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And my dream broke, like life from the last limb⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quivering; so loth I felt to let it go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Just as I thought I had caught sight of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It came to nought, as dreams of Heaven on earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do always.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is time we part again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Farewell, then, gentle stars! To-night, farewell!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For we all part at once. It is thus the bright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Visions and joys of youth break up⁠—but they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever. When ye shine again I will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be with ye; for I love ye next to him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all, adieu! When shall I see thee next?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lady, I know not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Never! perchance.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is but one immortal in the world</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who need say⁠—never!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What if I were he?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But thou art not he; and thou shalt not say it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stars vise and set⁠—rise, set, and rise again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In their sublime-like beauty through all time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should not we, too, ever meet, like them?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I see no beauty⁠—feel no love⁠—all things</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are unlovely.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O earth! be deaf; and Heaven!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shut thy blue eye. He doth blaspheme the world.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dost not love me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Love thee? Ay! Earth and Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Together could not make a love like mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When wilt thou come again? To-morrow?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And then I cross yon sea ere I return;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I have matters in another land.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fear not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When will our parting days be over?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh! soon⁠—soon! Think of me love, on the waters!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be happy! and, for me, I love few things more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than at night to ride upon the broad-backed billow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seaing along and plunging on his precipitous path;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While the red moon is westering low away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the mad waves are fighting for the stars,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like men for⁠—what they know not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Scorner!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Saint!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The world hath much that’s great; and but one sea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is her spirit; and to her it stands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As the mad monarch passion to the heart⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fathomless, overwhelming, which receives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rivers of all feeling; in whose depths</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lie wrecked the riches of all nature. God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When He did make thee, moved upon thee then,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And left His impress there, the same even now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when thy last wave leapt from Chaos.⁠—Hark!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, there is some one coming.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I said we should be sure to meet thee here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have brought one who would speak with thee.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thanks! and where is he?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yonder. He would not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come up so far as this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who he may be, or what; but I can guess.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Remain a moment, love, till I return.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay⁠—let me leave!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not yet: do not dislike him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is a friend, and⁠—more another time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am sorry, lady, to have caused this parting.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fear I am unwelcome.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We were parting.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then am I doubly sorry; for I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is the saddest and the sacredest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Moment of all with those who love.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He is coming!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I forgive thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I must leave thee, love:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know not for how long; it rests with thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If it seem long at all. Eternity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Might pass, and I not know it in thy love.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If to believe that I do love thee always</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May make time fly the fleeter⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ll believe it⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trust me. I leave this lady in thy charge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be kind⁠—wait on her⁠—may he, love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou knowest. I receive him as thy friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whenever he come.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I ask no higher title</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than friend of the lovely and the generous.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Farewell!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lady! I will not forget my trust.</span>
								<br/>
								<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Apart.</i> The breeze which curls the lake’s bright lip but lifts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A purer, deeper, water to the light;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ruffling of the wild bird’s wing but wakes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A warmer beauty and a downier depth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That startled shrink, that faintest blossom-blush</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of constancy alarmed!⁠—Love! if thou hast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One weapon in that shining armoury,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The quiver on thy shoulder, where thou keep’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each arrowy eye-beam feathered with a sigh;⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If from that bow, shaped so like Beauty’s lip</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strung with a string of pearls, thou wilt twang forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bat one dart, fair into the mark I mean⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do it, and I will worship thee for ever:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, I will give thee glory and a name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Known, sunlike, in all nations. Heart, be still!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This parting over⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, this one⁠—and then?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, then another, may be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No⁠—no more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll be unhappy if thou tell’st me so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, then⁠—no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But when wilt thou come back?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Almost before thou wishest. He will know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elissa</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I shall be always asking him. Farewell! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shine on, ye stars! and light her to her rest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scarce are ye worthy for her handmaidens.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why, Hell would laugh to learn I had been in love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have affairs in Hell. Wilt go with me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, in a month or two:⁠—not just this minute.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I shall be there and back again ere then.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Meanwhile I can amuse myself: so, go!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But sometime I would fain behold thy home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pass the gates of fire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And so thou shalt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My home is everywhere where spirit is.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things are as I meant them. Fare thee well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The strongest passion which I have is honour:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would I had none: it is in my way.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
