<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-25" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—The Sun.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Soul of the world, divine Necessity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Servant of God, and master of all things!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here, in the Heaven of light’s eternal noon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First see I all things clear: from end to end</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The divine cycle of the soul of man;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How spirit, soul, mind, life, flesh, feeling, mix,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And how, withal they each reciprocate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As ocean, earth, air, fire and wind; how flow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The streams of feeling, and the cataracts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of passion; mine and mountain, this of pride,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that of covetousness. Man I know;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The human universe and the divine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And central fate; know all must be fufilled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of nature that there is; of sin and strife,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Peace, righteousness, change, self-delusion, self⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Destruction, ere the earth can take new life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or man become the minister of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The world and man are just reciprocal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet contrary. Spirit invadeth sense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And carries captive Nature. Be this true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All good is Heaven, and all ill is Hell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things are means for greater good. Thou, Sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art just a giant-slave, a god in bonds.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The summit-flower of all created life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is its unition with Divinity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In essence, yet existence separate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High o’er my own existence, here then I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look down upon the nature and the earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet mine, whose separate and combined ends</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have still to be evolved. How wide men miss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While in the lower world of soul and sense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In aiming even at life-ruling Truth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Formless as air, simple and one as Death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If Heaven and all its stars depend on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then may eternity on time;⁠—not else.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But since now earth is as a crumb of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And time an atom of eternity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Neither depends upon the other, both</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One essence being emanant from God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose flowings forth are aye and infinite,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And radiant as the rivers of the skies.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One only truth hath consequence, God’s truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inspirited in man. Mere human truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or falsehood matters not. The world may act,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Believe, or bless, or curse, as best it lists.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet men expend life, solemnizing points</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Uncertain as the site of Paradise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And area of Hades. Not the less,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is no disappointment we endure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One half so great as that we are to ourselves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We make our hearts the centres of all hopes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All powers, all rewards, remembering not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That centres are imaginary points.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Imaginary circles only too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are perfect; therefore, draw life as we may,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bound as a world, or as an atom round,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pure as virgin visionary’s dream,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or perfect faith’s regenerative wave⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It fails to match the true invisible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof we labor. It is come to this.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One state of life with me hath passed away.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aught henceforth that may matter be of doubt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me is matter of indifference. I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Love only that is certain. Me no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The spirits of the bright invisible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall throng round as the winds some mountain-top;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor watery lightfulness of ghostly eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Belonging heavenly forms informed with light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Impose their spell of record under pain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The inspiration quits me⁠—it is gone⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a retreating army from the land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which it hath wasted⁠—the long gleaming mass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Snakelike, at last hath wound itself away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And left me weak and wretched. None again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all the starry tribes of shining mien⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swifter than undulations of the light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A million in a moment, multiform</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As atomies of air, shall visit me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their word of leave is taken back⁠—henceforth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Restricted to perfection, earth they quit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>True, albeit, I loved them more than life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I felt myself made sacred by their touch:⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But they are gone, and there is nought on earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Left acceptable. Fiery shadows, hence!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have outbraved ye once. It matters not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have left all for one; Truth’s countless rays</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Truth itself; the mean for the supreme,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dubitable for the throned power.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet thus I cannot rest. The mightiest sphere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is not for man. The elements of mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And matter are proportioned in all worlds;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The father they and mother of all things.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And earth hath favour over crowds of stars.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must reseek earth. Still what boots it now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To plunge in pleasure or to passion bow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The very lion-honey of the heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which dwelleth in corruption? Yet, perchance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twere wisdom to extract it while we may.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The oak, as lily, feels the lightest breeze.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ineradicable seed is sown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of love in life, and tide-like ’twill have way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er the impalaced prisoner of the breast.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The thirst for power and knowledge still exist,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And meet with dizzy mixture in the brain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If suffering could expiate offence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They who have most enjoyed have most atoned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It may be, humanly;⁠—but it cannot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Earth-like, the heart must undergo all change</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere the superior life be formed therein,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The chastity of heart which loves but God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Life’s sensuous warmth, the spirit’s holy chill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Time’s week-day work, have yet to be gone through.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hortus siccus of a Paradise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all earth now can boast. To God belongs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The autumn of all nature. But, alas!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not yet can we o’ercome our nature here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would we. If therefore passion strike the heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let it have length of line and plenteous play.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The safety of superior principles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lies in exhaustion of the lower ones,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>However vast or violent. Men and angels</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Obey the order of existence. Fate!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who seeks thee everywhere, will find thee there.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
