<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-17" epub:type="z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
			<p>Scene⁠—Space.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Listen! I hear the harmonies of Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From sphere to sphere and from the boundless round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Re-echoing bliss to those serenest heights</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where angels sit and strike their emulous harps,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wreathed round with flowers and diamonded with dew;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such dew as gemmed the everduring blooms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Eden winterless, or as all night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tree of Life wept from its every leaf</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwithering. And now methinks I hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The music of the murmur of the stream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which through the Bridal City of the Lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Floweth all life for ever; and the breath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the star-shading branches of that Tree</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Transplanted now to Heaven, but once on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose fruit is for all Beings⁠—breathed of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! breathe on me, inspiring spirit-breath!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh! flow to me, ye heart-reviving waves;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freshen the faded soul that droops and dies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The universe is but the gate of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo! from this highest orb, the crown of space</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And footstool unto Heaven, we can look up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And gain a glimpse of glory unconceived.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See how yon angels stretch their shining arms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wave their star-haunting wings which gleam like glass,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And locks that look like Morning’s when she comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Triumphant in the East. Is this their joy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er some world penitent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo! there it rides;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blest to discharge on Heaven’s all peaceful shores</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its long accumulated load of life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its deathless freight⁠—pilgrims of time and space.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yon guilty orb of hesitating light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slow looming, there, on its dark path, goes up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At the forewritten hour, as do all worlds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To God, to judgment; and the earthquake groans</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which rend its adamantine breast forebode</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its agonizing doom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And doth not Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grieve with the lost as gladden with the saved?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How many immortals mourn at the decree</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of righteous wisdom, which alone to them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is bliss sufficient, being infinite?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If God hath made all He alone it is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who hath to answer for all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He hath made.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To secondary natures it seems just</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That justice should be realised, and there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is one example extant in the skies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But wherefore did it not repent in Time?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What unto us is Time, stands before God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eternity. Repentance is the grief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For and effectual abstinence from sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which secondary natures without God</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cannot, attain to.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Festus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Cloudy and dear by turns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy words as Heaven. I know not what to think</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor how to act.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucifer</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is natural; and none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can aim or hit but as appointed them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There is but one great sinner, Human nature,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Predict of every world and predicate:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wicked one, the Enemy of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be destroyed in the eternal fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of His wrath, even thus in Deity⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In whom as they begin must all things end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God loveth only His own spirit, so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that is base shall perish. From the first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These things were fixed, and are and aye shall be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Consummating, and are revealed as writ</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In words always fulfilled and burning truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under the buried basements of the skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which after overthrown shall reäppear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The unenlightened mind sees Deity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all things, but the spiritual soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All things in God. Now, ere we higher rise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look downwards from this coping of the world;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And know that down to the profoundest depth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of utter space, where not an atom mars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The void invisible, it were easier far</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To cast a line and calculate its rate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or pierce all space, nor cross the path of light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than fathom man’s dark heart or sound his soul.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
